F
rom
Dictatorship
to
Democracy
A Conceptual Framework for Liberation
Fourth U.s. edition
Gene sharp
the albert einstein institution
All material appearing in this
publication is in the public domain(cid:17)
Citation of the source, and notification to the
Albert Einstein Institution for the reproduction,
translation, and reprinting of this publication, are requested.
First Edition, May 2002
Second Edition, June 2003
Third Edition, February 2008
Fourth Edition, May 2010
From Dictatorship to Democracy was originally published in Bangkok
in 1993 by the Committee for the Restoration of Democracy in Burma
in association with Khit Pyaing (The New Era Journal). It has since
been translated into at least thirty-one other languages and has been
published in Serbia, Indonesia, and Thailand, among other countries.
This is the fourth United States Edition.
Printed in the United States of America.
Printed on Recycled Paper.
The Albert Einstein Institution
P.O. Box 455
East Boston, MA 02128, USA
Tel: USA +1 617-247-4882
Fax: USA +1 617-247-4035
E-mail: einstein@igc.org
Website: www.aeinstein.org
ISBN 1-880813-09-2
From Dictatorship to Democracy v
table oF contents
preFace vii
one
Facing Dictatorships realistically 1
A continuing problem 2
Freedom through violence? 4
Coups, elections, foreign saviors? 5
Facing the hard truth 7
two
the Dangers oF negotiations 9
Merits and limitations of negotiations 10
Negotiated surrender? 10
Power and justice in negotiations 12
“Agreeable” dictators 13
What kind of peace? 14
Reasons for hope 14
three
whence comes the power? 17
The “Monkey Master” fable 17
Necessary sources of political power 18
Centers of democratic power 21
Four
Dictatorships have weaknesses 25
Identifying the Achilles’ heel 25
Weaknesses of dictatorships 26
Attacking weaknesses of dictatorships 27
Five
exercising power 29
The workings of nonviolent struggle 30
Nonviolent weapons and discipline 30
vi Gene Sharp
Openness, secrecy, and high standards 33
Shifting power relationships 34
Four mechanisms of change 35
Democratizing effects of political defiance 37
Complexity of nonviolent struggle 38
six
the neeD For strategic planning 39
Realistic planning 39
Hurdles to planning 40
Four important terms in strategic planning 43
seven
planning strategy 47
Choice of means 48
Planning for democracy 49
External assistance 50
Formulating a grand strategy 50
Planning campaign strategies 53
Spreading the idea of noncooperation 55
Repression and countermeasures 56
Adhering to the strategic plan 57
eight
applying political DeFiance 59
Selective resistance 59
Symbolic challenge 60
Spreading responsibility 61
Aiming at the dictators’ power 62
Shifts in strategy 64
nine
Disintegrating the Dictatorship 67
Escalating freedom 69
Disintegrating the dictatorship 70
Handling success responsibly 71
From Dictatorship to Democracy vii
ten
grounDwork For Durable Democracy 73
Threats of a new dictatorship 73
Blocking coups 74
Constitution drafting 75
A democratic defense policy 76
A meritorious responsibility 76
appenDix one
the methoDs oF nonviolent action 79
appenDix two
acknowleDgements anD notes on
the history oF From Dictatorship to Democracy 87
appenDix three
a note about translations anD
reprinting oF this publication 91
For Further reaDing 93
preFace
One of my major concerns for many years has been how people
could prevent and destroy dictatorships. This has been nurtured in
part because of a belief that human beings should not be dominated
and destroyed by such regimes. That belief has been strengthened
by readings on the importance of human freedom, on the nature of
dictatorships (from Aristotle to analysts of totalitarianism), and his-
tories of dictatorships (especially the Nazi and Stalinist systems).
Over the years I have had occasion to get to know people who
lived and suffered under Nazi rule, including some who survived
concentration camps. In Norway I met people who had resisted
fascist rule and survived, and heard of those who perished. I talked
with Jews who had escaped the Nazi clutches and with persons who
had helped to save them.
Knowledge of the terror of Communist rule in various countries
has been learned more from books than personal contacts. The terror
of these systems appeared to me to be especially poignant for these
dictatorships were imposed in the name of liberation from oppres-
sion and exploitation.
In more recent decades through visits of persons from dicta-
torially ruled countries, such as Panama, Poland, Chile, Tibet, and
Burma, the realities of today’s dictatorships became more real. From
Tibetans who had fought against Chinese Communist aggression,
Russians who had defeated the August 1991 hard-line coup, and
Thais who had nonviolently blocked a return to military rule, I
have gained often troubling perspectives on the insidious nature of
dictatorships.
The sense of pathos and outrage against the brutalities, along
with admiration of the calm heroism of unbelievably brave men
and women, were sometimes strengthened by visits to places where
the dangers were still great, and yet defiance by brave people con-
tinued. These included Panama under Noriega; Vilnius, Lithuania,
under continued Soviet repression; Tiananmen Square, Beijing,
during both the festive demonstration of freedom and while the
vii
viii Gene Sharp
first armored personnel carriers entered that fateful night; and the
jungle headquarters of the democratic opposition at Manerplaw in
“liberated Burma.”
Sometimes I visited the sites of the fallen, as the television tower
and the cemetery in Vilnius, the public park in Riga where people
had been gunned down, the center of Ferrara in northern Italy where
the fascists lined up and shot resisters, and a simple cemetery in
Manerplaw filled with bodies of men who had died much too young.
It is a sad realization that every dictatorship leaves such death and
destruction in its wake.
Out of these concerns and experiences grew a determined
hope that prevention of tyranny might be possible, that successful
struggles against dictatorships could be waged without mass mu-
tual slaughters, that dictatorships could be destroyed and new ones
prevented from rising out of the ashes.
I have tried to think carefully about the most effective ways
in which dictatorships could be successfully disintegrated with the
least possible cost in suffering and lives. In this I have drawn on my
studies over many years of dictatorships, resistance movements,
revolutions, political thought, governmental systems, and especially
realistic nonviolent struggle.
This publication is the result. I am certain it is far from perfect.
But, perhaps, it offers some guidelines to assist thought and plan-
ning to produce movements of liberation that are more powerful
and effective than might otherwise be the case.
Of necessity, and of deliberate choice, the focus of this essay is
on the generic problem of how to destroy a dictatorship and to pre-
vent the rise of a new one. I am not competent to produce a detailed
analysis and prescription for a particular country. However, it is my
hope that this generic analysis may be useful to people in, unfortu-
nately, too many countries who now face the realities of dictatorial
rule. They will need to examine the validity of this analysis for their
situations and the extent to which its major recommendations are, or
can be made to be, applicable for their liberation struggles.
Nowhere in this analysis do I assume that defying dictators will
be an easy or cost-free endeavor. All forms of struggle have complica-
From Dictatorship to Democracy ix
tions and costs. Fighting dictators will, of course, bring casualties. It
is my hope, however, that this analysis will spur resistance leaders
to consider strategies that may increase their effective power while
reducing the relative level of casualties.
Nor should this analysis be interpreted to mean that when a
specific dictatorship is ended, all other problems will also disappear.
The fall of one regime does not bring in a utopia. Rather, it opens the
way for hard work and long efforts to build more just social, eco-
nomic, and political relationships and the eradication of other forms
of injustices and oppression. It is my hope that this brief examina-
tion of how a dictatorship can be disintegrated may be found useful
wherever people live under domination and desire to be free.
Gene Sharp
6 October 1993
Albert Einstein Institution
Boston, Massachusetts
o
ne
Facing Dictatorships realistically
In recent years various dictatorships — of both internal and external
origin — have collapsed or stumbled when confronted by defiant,
mobilized people. Often seen as firmly entrenched and impregnable,
some of these dictatorships proved unable to withstand the concerted
political, economic, and social defiance of the people.
Since 1980 dictatorships have collapsed before the predominant-
ly nonviolent defiance of people in Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania,
Poland, East Germany, Czechoslovakia and Slovenia, Madagascar,
Mali, Bolivia, and the Philippines. Nonviolent resistance has fur-
thered the movement toward democratization in Nepal, Zambia,
South Korea, Chile, Argentina, Haiti, Brazil, Uruguay, Malawi, Thai-
land, Bulgaria, Hungary, Nigeria, and various parts of the former
Soviet Union (playing a significant role in the defeat of the August
1991 attempted hard-line coup d’état).
In addition, mass political defiance1 has occurred in China,
Burma, and Tibet in recent years. Although those struggles have
not brought an end to the ruling dictatorships or occupations, they
have exposed the brutal nature of those repressive regimes to the
world community and have provided the populations with valuable
experience with this form of struggle.
1 The term used in this context was introduced by Robert Helvey. “Political defi-
ance” is nonviolent struggle (protest, noncooperation, and intervention) applied
defiantly and actively for political purposes. The term originated in response to
the confusion and distortion created by equating nonviolent struggle with pacifism
and moral or religious “nonviolence.” “Defiance” denotes a deliberate challenge to
authority by disobedience, allowing no room for submission. “Political defiance”
describes the environment in which the action is employed (political) as well as
the objective (political power). The term is used principally to describe action by
populations to regain from dictatorships control over governmental institutions
by relentlessly attacking their sources of power and deliberately using strategic
planning and operations to do so. In this paper, political defiance, nonviolent re-
sistance, and nonviolent struggle will be used interchangeably, although the latter
two terms generally refer to struggles with a broader range of objectives (social,
economic, psychological, etc.).
1
2 Gene Sharp
The collapse of dictatorships in the above named countries cer-
tainly has not erased all other problems in those societies: poverty,
crime, bureaucratic inefficiency, and environmental destruction are
often the legacy of brutal regimes. However, the downfall of these
dictatorships has minimally lifted much of the suffering of the vic-
tims of oppression, and has opened the way for the rebuilding of
these societies with greater political democracy, personal liberties,
and social justice.
a continuing problem
There has indeed been a trend towards greater democratization and
freedom in the world in the past decades. According to Freedom
House, which compiles a yearly international survey of the status of
political rights and civil liberties, the number of countries around the
world classified as “Free” has grown significantly in recent years:2
Free partly Free not Free
1983 54 47 64
1993 75 73 38
2003 89 55 48
2009 89 62 42
However, this positive trend is tempered by the large numbers
of people still living under conditions of tyranny. As of 2008, 34% of
the world’s 6.68 billion population lived in countries designated as
“Not Free,”3 that is, areas with extremely restricted political rights
and civil liberties. The 42 countries in the “Not Free” category are
ruled by a range of military dictatorships (as in Burma), traditional
repressive monarchies (as in Saudi Arabia and Bhutan), dominant
political parties (as in China and North Korea), foreign occupiers (as
in Tibet and Western Sahara), or are in a state of transition.
2 Freedom House, Freedom in the World, http://www.freedomhouse.org.
3 Ibid.
From Dictatorship to Democracy 3
Many countries today are in a state of rapid economic, political,
and social change. Although the number of “Free” countries has in-
creased in recent years, there is a great risk that many nations, in the
face of such rapid fundamental changes, will move in the opposite
direction and experience new forms of dictatorship. Military cliques,
ambitious individuals, elected officials, and doctrinal political parties
will repeatedly seek to impose their will. Coups d’état are and will
remain a common occurrence. Basic human and political rights will
continue to be denied to vast numbers of peoples.
Unfortunately, the past is still with us. The problem of dictator-
ships is deep. People in many countries have experienced decades or
even centuries of oppression, whether of domestic or foreign origin.
Frequently, unquestioning submission to authority figures and rul-
ers has been long inculcated. In extreme cases, the social, political,
economic, and even religious institutions of the society — outside
of state control — have been deliberately weakened, subordinated,
or even replaced by new regimented institutions used by the state
or ruling party to control the society. The population has often been
atomized (turned into a mass of isolated individuals) unable to work
together to achieve freedom, to confide in each other, or even to do
much of anything at their own initiative.
The result is predictable: the population becomes weak, lacks
self-confidence, and is incapable of resistance. People are often too
frightened to share their hatred of the dictatorship and their hun-
ger for freedom even with family and friends. People are often too
terrified to think seriously of public resistance. In any case, what
would be the use? Instead, they face suffering without purpose and
a future without hope.
Current conditions in today’s dictatorships may be much worse
than earlier. In the past, some people may have attempted resistance.
Short-lived mass protests and demonstrations may have occurred.
Perhaps spirits soared temporarily. At other times, individuals and
small groups may have conducted brave but impotent gestures,
asserting some principle or simply their defiance. However noble
the motives, such past acts of resistance have often been insufficient
to overcome the people’s fear and habit of obedience, a necessary
4 Gene Sharp
prerequisite to destroy the dictatorship. Sadly, those acts may have
brought instead only increased suffering and death, not victories or
even hope.
Freedom through violence?
What is to be done in such circumstances? The obvious possibilities
seem useless. Constitutional and legal barriers, judicial decisions,
and public opinion are normally ignored by dictators. Under-
standably, reacting to the brutalities, torture, disappearances, and
killings, people often have concluded that only violence can end a
dictatorship. Angry victims have sometimes organized to fight the
brutal dictators with whatever violent and military capacity they
could muster, despite the odds being against them. These people
have often fought bravely, at great cost in suffering and lives. Their
accomplishments have sometimes been remarkable, but they rarely
have won freedom. Violent rebellions can trigger brutal repression
that frequently leaves the populace more helpless than before.
Whatever the merits of the violent option, however, one point
is clear. By placing confidence in violent means, one has chosen the very
type of struggle with which the oppressors nearly always have superior-
ity. The dictators are equipped to apply violence overwhelmingly.
However long or briefly these democrats can continue, eventually
the harsh military realities usually become inescapable. The dictators
almost always have superiority in military hardware, ammunition,
transportation, and the size of military forces. Despite bravery, the
democrats are (almost always) no match.
When conventional military rebellion is recognized as unrealis-
tic, some dissidents then favor guerrilla warfare. However, guerrilla
warfare rarely, if ever, benefits the oppressed population or ushers in
a democracy. Guerrilla warfare is no obvious solution, particularly
given the very strong tendency toward immense casualties among
one’s own people. The technique is no guarantor against failure,
despite supporting theory and strategic analyses, and sometimes
international backing. Guerrilla struggles often last a very long
time. Civilian populations are often displaced by the ruling gov-
From Dictatorship to Democracy 5
ernment, with immense human suffering and social dislocation.
Even when successful, guerrilla struggles often have signifi-
cant long-term negative structural consequences. Immediately, the
attacked regime becomes more dictatorial as a result of its coun-
termeasures. If the guerrillas should finally succeed, the resulting
new regime is often more dictatorial than its predecessor due to the
centralizing impact of the expanded military forces and the weaken-
ing or destruction of the society’s independent groups and institu-
tions during the struggle — bodies that are vital in establishing and
maintaining a democratic society. Persons hostile to dictatorships
should look for another option.
coups, elections, foreign saviors?
A military coup d’état against a dictatorship might appear to be
relatively one of the easiest and quickest ways to remove a particu-
larly repugnant regime. However, there are very serious problems
with that technique. Most importantly, it leaves in place the existing
maldistribution of power between the population and the elite in
control of the government and its military forces. The removal of
particular persons and cliques from the governing positions most
likely will merely make it possible for another group to take their
place. Theoretically, this group might be milder in its behavior and
be open in limited ways to democratic reforms. However, the op-
posite is as likely to be the case.
After consolidating its position, the new clique may turn out to
be more ruthless and more ambitious than the old one. Consequently,
the new clique — in which hopes may have been placed — will be
able to do whatever it wants without concern for democracy or
human rights. That is not an acceptable answer to the problem of
dictatorship.
Elections are not available under dictatorships as an instru-
ment of significant political change. Some dictatorial regimes,
such as those of the former Soviet-dominated Eastern bloc, went
through the motions in order to appear democratic. Those elections,
however, were merely rigidly controlled plebiscites to get public
6 Gene Sharp
endorsement of candidates already hand picked by the dictators.
Dictators under pressure may at times agree to new elections, but
then rig them to place civilian puppets in government offices. If
opposition candidates have been allowed to run and were actually
elected, as occurred in Burma in 1990 and Nigeria in 1993, results
may simply be ignored and the “victors” subjected to intimida-
tion, arrest, or even execution. Dictators are not in the business
of allowing elections that could remove them from their thrones.
Many people now suffering under a brutal dictatorship, or who
have gone into exile to escape its immediate grasp, do not believe that
the oppressed can liberate themselves. They expect that their people
can only be saved by the actions of others. These people place their
confidence in external forces. They believe that only international
help can be strong enough to bring down the dictators.
The view that the oppressed are unable to act effectively is
sometimes accurate for a certain time period. As noted, often op-
pressed people are unwilling and temporarily unable to struggle
because they have no confidence in their ability to face the ruthless
dictatorship, and no known way to save themselves. It is therefore
understandable that many people place their hope for liberation in
others. This outside force may be “public opinion,” the United Na-
tions, a particular country, or international economic and political
sanctions.
Such a scenario may sound comforting, but there are grave
problems with this reliance on an outside savior. Such confidence
may be totally misplaced. Usually no foreign saviors are coming, and
if a foreign state does intervene, it probably should not be trusted.
A few harsh realities concerning reliance on foreign intervention
need to be emphasized here:
• Frequently foreign states will tolerate, or even positively as-
sist, a dictatorship in order to advance their own economic
or political interests.
• Foreign states also may be willing to sell out an oppressed
people instead of keeping pledges to assist their liberation
at the cost of another objective.
From Dictatorship to Democracy 7
• Some foreign states will act against a dictatorship only to
gain their own economic, political, or military control over
the country.
• The foreign states may become actively involved for posi-
tive purposes only if and when the internal resistance move-
ment has already begun shaking the dictatorship, having
thereby focused international attention on the brutal nature
of the regime.
Dictatorships usually exist primarily because of the internal
power distribution in the home country. The population and society
are too weak to cause the dictatorship serious problems, wealth and
power are concentrated in too few hands. Although dictatorships
may benefit from or be somewhat weakened by international actions,
their continuation is dependent primarily on internal factors.
International pressures can be very useful, however, when they
are supporting a powerful internal resistance movement. Then, for
example, international economic boycotts, embargoes, the breaking
of diplomatic relations, expulsion from international organizations,
condemnation by United Nations bodies, and the like can assist
greatly. However, in the absence of a strong internal resistance
movement such actions by others are unlikely to happen.
Facing the hard truth
The conclusion is a hard one. When one wants to bring down a
dictatorship most effectively and with the least cost then one has
four immediate tasks:
• One must strengthen the oppressed population themselves
in their determination, self-confidence, and resistance skills;
• One must strengthen the independent social groups and in-
stitutions of the oppressed people;
• One must create a powerful internal resistance force; and
8 Gene Sharp
• One must develop a wise grand strategic plan for liberation
and implement it skillfully.
A liberation struggle is a time for self-reliance and internal
strengthening of the struggle group. As Charles Stewart Parnell
called out during the Irish rent strike campaign in 1879 and 1880:
It is no use relying on the Government . . . . You must only
rely upon your own determination . . . . [H]elp yourselves
by standing together . . . strengthen those amongst your-
selves who are weak . . . , band yourselves together, orga-
nize yourselves . . . and you must win . . .
When you have made this question ripe for settlement,
then and not till then will it be settled.4
Against a strong self-reliant force, given wise strategy, disci-
plined and courageous action, and genuine strength, the dictator-
ship will eventually crumble. Minimally, however, the above four
requirements must be fulfilled.
As the above discussion indicates, liberation from dictatorships
ultimately depends on the people’s ability to liberate themselves.
The cases of successful political defiance — or nonviolent struggle
for political ends — cited above indicate that the means do exist
for populations to free themselves, but that option has remained
undeveloped. We will examine this option in detail in the following
chapters. However, we should first look at the issue of negotiations
as a means of dismantling dictatorships.
4 Patrick Sarsfield O’Hegarty, A History of Ireland Under the Union, 1880-1922 (London:
Methuen, 1952), pp. 490-491.
t
wo
the Dangers oF negotiations
When faced with the severe problems of confronting a dictator-
ship (as surveyed in Chapter One), some people may lapse back
into passive submission. Others, seeing no prospect of achieving
democracy, may conclude they must come to terms with the appar-
ently permanent dictatorship, hoping that through “conciliation,”
“compromise,” and “negotiations” they might be able to salvage
some positive elements and to end the brutalities. On the surface,
lacking realistic options, there is appeal in that line of thinking.
Serious struggle against brutal dictatorships is not a pleasant
prospect. Why is it necessary to go that route? Can’t everyone just
be reasonable and find ways to talk, to negotiate the way to a gradual
end to the dictatorship? Can’t the democrats appeal to the dicta-
tors’ sense of common humanity and convince them to reduce their
domination bit by bit, and perhaps finally to give way completely
to the establishment of a democracy?
It is sometimes argued that the truth is not all on one side. Per-
haps the democrats have misunderstood the dictators, who may have
acted from good motives in difficult circumstances? Or perhaps some
may think, the dictators would gladly remove themselves from the
difficult situation facing the country if only given some encourage-
ment and enticements. It may be argued that the dictators could be
offered a “win-win” solution, in which everyone gains something.
The risks and pain of further struggle could be unnecessary, it may
be argued, if the democratic opposition is only willing to settle the
conflict peacefully by negotiations (which may even perhaps be
assisted by some skilled individuals or even another government).
Would that not be preferable to a difficult struggle, even if it is one
conducted by nonviolent struggle rather than by military war?
9
10 Gene Sharp
merits and limitations of negotiations
Negotiations are a very useful tool in resolving certain types of is-
sues in conflicts and should not be neglected or rejected when they
are appropriate.
In some situations where no fundamental issues are at stake,
and therefore a compromise is acceptable, negotiations can be an
important means to settle a conflict. A labor strike for higher wages
is a good example of the appropriate role of negotiations in a conflict:
a negotiated settlement may provide an increase somewhere between
the sums originally proposed by each of the contending sides. Labor
conflicts with legal trade unions are, however, quite different than
the conflicts in which the continued existence of a cruel dictatorship
or the establishment of political freedom are at stake.
When the issues at stake are fundamental, affecting religious
principles, issues of human freedom, or the whole future develop-
ment of the society, negotiations do not provide a way of reaching a
mutually satisfactory solution. On some basic issues there should
be no compromise. Only a shift in power relations in favor of the
democrats can adequately safeguard the basic issues at stake. Such
a shift will occur through struggle, not negotiations. This is not to
say that negotiations ought never to be used. The point here is that
negotiations are not a realistic way to remove a strong dictatorship
in the absence of a powerful democratic opposition.
Negotiations, of course, may not be an option at all. Firmly
entrenched dictators who feel secure in their position may refuse to
negotiate with their democratic opponents. Or, when negotiations
have been initiated, the democratic negotiators may disappear and
never be heard from again.
negotiated surrender?
Individuals and groups who oppose dictatorship and favor nego-
tiations will often have good motives. Especially when a military
struggle has continued for years against a brutal dictatorship without
final victory, it is understandable that all the people of whatever
From Dictatorship to Democracy 11
political persuasion would want peace. Negotiations are especially
likely to become an issue among democrats where the dictators have
clear military superiority and the destruction and casualties among
one’s own people are no longer bearable. There will then be a strong
temptation to explore any other route that might salvage some of the
democrats’ objectives while bringing an end to the cycle of violence
and counter-violence.
The offer by a dictatorship of “peace” through negotiations with
the democratic opposition is, of course, rather disingenuous. The
violence could be ended immediately by the dictators themselves, if
only they would stop waging war on their own people. They could
at their own initiative without any bargaining restore respect for
human dignity and rights, free political prisoners, end torture, halt
military operations, withdraw from the government, and apologize
to the people.
When the dictatorship is strong but an irritating resistance
exists, the dictators may wish to negotiate the opposition into sur-
render under the guise of making “peace.” The call to negotiate
can sound appealing, but grave dangers can be lurking within the
negotiating room.
On the other hand, when the opposition is exceptionally strong
and the dictatorship is genuinely threatened, the dictators may seek
negotiations in order to salvage as much of their control or wealth
as possible. In neither case should the democrats help the dictators
achieve their goals.
Democrats should be wary of the traps that may be deliber-
ately built into a negotiation process by the dictators. The call for
negotiations when basic issues of political liberties are involved may
be an effort by the dictators to induce the democrats to surrender
peacefully while the violence of the dictatorship continues. In those
types of conflicts the only proper role of negotiations may occur at
the end of a decisive struggle in which the power of the dictators
has been effectively destroyed and they seek personal safe passage
to an international airport.
12 Gene Sharp
power and justice in negotiations
If this judgment sounds too harsh a commentary on negotiations,
perhaps some of the romanticism associated with them needs to
be moderated. Clear thinking is required as to how negotiations
operate.
“Negotiation” does not mean that the two sides sit down to-
gether on a basis of equality and talk through and resolve the dif-
ferences that produced the conflict between them. Two facts must
be remembered. First, in negotiations it is not the relative justice of
the conflicting views and objectives that determines the content of a
negotiated agreement. Second, the content of a negotiated agreement
is largely determined by the power capacity of each side.
Several difficult questions must be considered. What can each
side do at a later date to gain its objectives if the other side fails to
come to an agreement at the negotiating table? What can each side
do after an agreement is reached if the other side breaks its word
and uses its available forces to seize its objectives despite the agree-
ment?
A settlement is not reached in negotiations through an assess-
ment of the rights and wrongs of the issues at stake. While those
may be much discussed, the real results in negotiations come from
an assessment of the absolute and relative power situations of the
contending groups. What can the democrats do to ensure that their
minimum claims cannot be denied? What can the dictators do to
stay in control and neutralize the democrats? In other words, if an
agreement comes, it is more likely the result of each side estimat-
ing how the power capacities of the two sides compare, and then
calculating how an open struggle might end.
Attention must also be given to what each side is willing to give
up in order to reach agreement. In successful negotiations there is
compromise, a splitting of differences. Each side gets part of what
it wants and gives up part of its objectives.
In the case of extreme dictatorships what are the pro-democ-
racy forces to give up to the dictators? What objectives of
the dictators are the pro-democracy forces to accept? Are the
From Dictatorship to Democracy 13
democrats to give to the dictators (whether a political party or
a military cabal) a constitutionally-established permanent role
in the future government? Where is the democracy in that?
Even assuming that all goes well in negotiations, it is necessary
to ask: What kind of peace will be the result? Will life then be bet-
ter or worse than it would be if the democrats began or continued
to struggle?
“agreeable” dictators
Dictators may have a variety of motives and objectives underlying
their domination: power, position, wealth, reshaping the society, and
the like. One should remember that none of these will be served if
they abandon their control positions. In the event of negotiations
dictators will try to preserve their goals.
Whatever promises offered by dictators in any negotiated
settlement, no one should ever forget that the dictators may promise
anything to secure submission from their democratic opponents, and
then brazenly violate those same agreements.
If the democrats agree to halt resistance in order to gain a re-
prieve from repression, they may be very disappointed. A halt to
resistance rarely brings reduced repression. Once the restraining
force of internal and international opposition has been removed,
dictators may even make their oppression and violence more brutal
than before. The collapse of popular resistance often removes the
countervailing force that has limited the control and brutality of the
dictatorship. The tyrants can then move ahead against whomever
they wish. “For the tyrant has the power to inflict only that which
we lack the strength to resist,” wrote Krishnalal Shridharani.5
Resistance, not negotiations, is essential for change in conflicts
where fundamental issues are at stake. In nearly all cases, resistance
must continue to drive dictators out of power. Success is most often
5 Krishnalal Shridharani, War Without Violence: A Study of Gandhi’s Method and Its
Accomplishments (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1939, and reprint New York and
London: Garland Publishing, 1972), p. 260.
14 Gene Sharp
determined not by negotiating a settlement but through the wise use
of the most appropriate and powerful means of resistance available.
It is our contention, to be explored later in more detail, that political
defiance, or nonviolent struggle, is the most powerful means avail-
able to those struggling for freedom.
What kind of peace?
If dictators and democrats are to talk about peace at all, extremely
clear thinking is needed because of the dangers involved. Not ev-
eryone who uses the word “peace” wants peace with freedom and
justice. Submission to cruel oppression and passive acquiescence to
ruthless dictators who have perpetrated atrocities on hundreds of
thousands of people is no real peace. Hitler often called for peace,
by which he meant submission to his will. A dictators’ peace is often
no more than the peace of the prison or of the grave.
There are other dangers. Well-intended negotiators sometimes
confuse the objectives of the negotiations and the negotiation process
itself. Further, democratic negotiators, or foreign negotiation special-
ists accepted to assist in the negotiations, may in a single stroke pro-
vide the dictators with the domestic and international legitimacy that
they had been previously denied because of their seizure of the state,
human rights violations, and brutalities. Without that desperately
needed legitimacy, the dictators cannot continue to rule indefinitely.
Exponents of peace should not provide them legitimacy.
reasons for hope
As stated earlier, opposition leaders may feel forced to pursue ne-
gotiations out of a sense of hopelessness of the democratic struggle.
However, that sense of powerlessness can be changed. Dictatorships
are not permanent. People living under dictatorships need not re-
main weak, and dictators need not be allowed to remain powerful
indefinitely. Aristotle noted long ago, “. . . [O]ligarchy and tyranny
are shorter-lived than any other constitution. . . . [A]ll round, tyran-
From Dictatorship to Democracy 15
nies have not lasted long.”6 Modern dictatorships are also vulnerable.
Their weaknesses can be aggravated and the dictators’ power can be
disintegrated. (In Chapter Four we will examine these weaknesses
in more detail.)
Recent history shows the vulnerability of dictatorships, and re-
veals that they can crumble in a relatively short time span: whereas
ten years — 1980-1990 — were required to bring down the Commu-
nist dictatorship in Poland, in East Germany and Czechoslovakia in
1989 it occurred within weeks. In El Salvador and Guatemala in 1944
the struggles against the entrenched brutal military dictators required
approximately two weeks each. The militarily powerful regime of
the Shah in Iran was undermined in a few months. The Marcos dic-
tatorship in the Philippines fell before people power within weeks
in 1986: the United States government quickly abandoned President
Marcos when the strength of the opposition became apparent. The
attempted hard-line coup in the Soviet Union in August 1991 was
blocked in days by political defiance. Thereafter, many of its long
dominated constituent nations in only days, weeks, and months
regained their independence.
The old preconception that violent means always work quickly
and nonviolent means always require vast time is clearly not valid.
Although much time may be required for changes in the underlying
situation and society, the actual fight against a dictatorship sometimes
occurs relatively quickly by nonviolent struggle.
Negotiations are not the only alternative to a continuing war
of annihilation on the one hand and capitulation on the other. The
examples just cited, as well as those listed in Chapter One, illustrate
that another option exists for those who want both peace and free-
dom: political defiance.
6 Aristotle, The Politics, transl. by T. A. Sinclair (Harmondsworth, Middlesex, Eng-
land and Baltimore, Maryland: Penguin Books 1976 [1962]), Book V, Chapter 12,
pp. 231 and 232.

t
hree
whence comes the power?
Achieving a society with both freedom and peace is of course no
simple task. It will require great strategic skill, organization, and
planning. Above all, it will require power. Democrats cannot hope
to bring down a dictatorship and establish political freedom without
the ability to apply their own power effectively.
But how is this possible? What kind of power can the democratic
opposition mobilize that will be sufficient to destroy the dictatorship
and its vast military and police networks? The answers lie in an oft
ignored understanding of political power. Learning this insight is
not really so difficult a task. Some basic truths are quite simple.
the “monkey master” fable
A Fourteenth Century Chinese parable by Liu-Ji, for example, out-
lines this neglected understanding of political power quite well:7
In the feudal state of Chu an old man survived by keeping
monkeys in his service. The people of Chu called him “ju
gong” (monkey master).
Each morning, the old man would assemble the monkeys
in his courtyard, and order the eldest one to lead the others
to the mountains to gather fruits from bushes and trees.
It was the rule that each monkey had to give one-tenth of
his collection to the old man. Those who failed to do so
would be ruthlessly flogged. All the monkeys suffered
bitterly, but dared not complain.
7 This story, originally titled “Rule by Tricks” is from Yu-li-zi by Liu Ji (1311-1375)
and has been translated by Sidney Tai, all rights reserved. Yu-li-zi is also the pseud-
onym of Liu Ji. The translation was originally published in Nonviolent Sanctions:
News from the Albert Einstein Institution (Cambridge, Mass.), Vol. IV, No. 3 (Winter
1992-1993), p. 3.
17
18 Gene Sharp
One day, a small monkey asked the other monkeys: “Did
the old man plant all the fruit trees and bushes?” The oth-
ers said: “No, they grew naturally.” The small monkey
further asked: “Can’t we take the fruits without the old
man’s permission?” The others replied: “Yes, we all can.”
The small monkey continued: “Then, why should we de-
pend on the old man; why must we all serve him?”
Before the small monkey was able to finish his statement,
all the monkeys suddenly became enlightened and awak-
ened.
On the same night, watching that the old man had fallen
asleep, the monkeys tore down all the barricades of the
stockade in which they were confined, and destroyed the
stockade entirely. They also took the fruits the old man had
in storage, brought all with them to the woods, and never
returned. The old man finally died of starvation.
Yu-li-zi says, “Some men in the world rule their people by
tricks and not by righteous principles. Aren’t they just like
the monkey master? They are not aware of their muddle-
headedness. As soon as their people become enlightened,
their tricks no longer work.”
necessary sources of political power
The principle is simple. Dictators require the assistance of the people
they rule, without which they cannot secure and maintain the sources
of political power. These sources of political power include:
• Authority, the belief among the people that the regime is le-
gitimate, and that they have a moral duty to obey it;
• Human resources, the number and importance of the persons
and groups which are obeying, cooperating, or providing
assistance to the rulers;
From Dictatorship to Democracy 19
• Skills and knowledge, needed by the regime to perform spe-
cific actions and supplied by the cooperating persons and
groups;
• Intangible factors, psychological and ideological factors that
may induce people to obey and assist the rulers;
• Material resources, the degree to which the rulers control or
have access to property, natural resources, financial resources,
the economic system, and means of communication and
transportation; and
• Sanctions, punishments, threatened or applied, against the
disobedient and noncooperative to ensure the submission
and cooperation that are needed for the regime to exist and
carry out its policies.
All of these sources, however, depend on acceptance of the
regime, on the submission and obedience of the population, and on
the cooperation of innumerable people and the many institutions of
the society. These are not guaranteed.
Full cooperation, obedience, and support will increase the avail-
ability of the needed sources of power and, consequently, expand
the power capacity of any government.
On the other hand, withdrawal of popular and institutional co-
operation with aggressors and dictators diminishes, and may sever,
the availability of the sources of power on which all rulers depend.
Without availability of those sources, the rulers’ power weakens and
finally dissolves.
Naturally, dictators are sensitive to actions and ideas that threat-
en their capacity to do as they like. Dictators are therefore likely to
threaten and punish those who disobey, strike, or fail to cooperate.
However, that is not the end of the story. Repression, even brutali-
ties, do not always produce a resumption of the necessary degree of
submission and cooperation for the regime to function.
20 Gene Sharp
If, despite repression, the sources of power can be restricted or
severed for enough time, the initial results may be uncertainty and
confusion within the dictatorship. That is likely to be followed by
a clear weakening of the power of the dictatorship. Over time, the
withholding of the sources of power can produce the paralysis and
impotence of the regime, and in severe cases, its disintegration. The
dictators’ power will die, slowly or rapidly, from political starva-
tion.
The degree of liberty or tyranny in any government is, it fol-
lows, in large degree a reflection of the relative determination of the
subjects to be free and their willingness and ability to resist efforts
to enslave them.
Contrary to popular opinion, even totalitarian dictatorships
are dependent on the population and the societies they rule. As the
political scientist Karl W. Deutsch noted in 1953:
Totalitarian power is strong only if it does not have to be
used too often. If totalitarian power must be used at all
times against the entire population, it is unlikely to remain
powerful for long. Since totalitarian regimes require more
power for dealing with their subjects than do other types
of government, such regimes stand in greater need of
widespread and dependable compliance habits among
their people; more than that they have to be able to count
on the active support of at least significant parts of the
population in case of need.8
The English Nineteenth Century legal theorist John Austin
described the situation of a dictatorship confronting a disaffected
people. Austin argued that if most of the population were deter-
mined to destroy the government and were willing to endure repres-
sion to do so, then the might of the government, including those
who supported it, could not preserve the hated government, even if
8 Karl W. Deutsch, “Cracks in the Monolith,” in Carl J. Friedrich, ed., Totalitarianism
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1954), pp. 313-314.
From Dictatorship to Democracy 21
it received foreign assistance. The defiant people could not be forced
back into permanent obedience and subjection, Austin concluded.9
Niccolo Machiavelli had much earlier argued that the prince
“. . . who has the public as a whole for his enemy can never make
himself secure; and the greater his cruelty, the weaker does his re-
gime become.”10
The practical political application of these insights was dem-
onstrated by the heroic Norwegian resisters against the Nazi occu-
pation, and as cited in Chapter One, by the brave Poles, Germans,
Czechs, Slovaks, and many others who resisted Communist aggres-
sion and dictatorship, and finally helped produce the collapse of
Communist rule in Europe. This, of course, is no new phenomenon:
cases of nonviolent resistance go back at least to 494 B.C. when ple-
beians withdrew cooperation from their Roman patrician masters.11
Nonviolent struggle has been employed at various times by peoples
throughout Asia, Africa, the Americas, Australasia, and the Pacific
islands, as well as Europe.
Three of the most important factors in determining to what
degree a government’s power will be controlled or uncontrolled
therefore are: (1) the relative desire of the populace to impose limits
on the government’s power; (2) the relative strength of the subjects’
independent organizations and institutions to withdraw collectively
the sources of power; and (3) the population’s relative ability to with-
hold their consent and assistance.
centers of democratic power
One characteristic of a democratic society is that there exist inde-
pendent of the state a multitude of nongovernmental groups and
9 John Austin, Lectures on Jurisprudence or the Philosophy of Positive Law (Fifth edition,
revised and edited by Robert Campbell, 2 vol., London: John Murray, 1911 [1861]),
Vol. I, p. 296.
10 Niccolo Machiavelli, “The Discourses on the First Ten Books of Livy,” in The
Discourses of Niccolo Machiavelli (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1950), Vol.
I, p. 254.
11 See Gene Sharp, The Politics of Nonviolent Action (Boston: Porter Sargent, 1973), p.
75 and passim for other historical examples.
22 Gene Sharp
institutions. These include, for example, families, religious organiza-
tions, cultural associations, sports clubs, economic institutions, trade
unions, student associations, political parties, villages, neighborhood
associations, gardening clubs, human rights organizations, musical
groups, literary societies, and others. These bodies are important
in serving their own objectives and also in helping to meet social
needs.
Additionally, these bodies have great political significance.
They provide group and institutional bases by which people can exert
influence over the direction of their society and resist other groups
or the government when they are seen to impinge unjustly on their
interests, activities, or purposes. Isolated individuals, not members
of such groups, usually are unable to make a significant impact on
the rest of the society, much less a government, and certainly not a
dictatorship.
Consequently, if the autonomy and freedom of such bodies
can be taken away by the dictators, the population will be relatively
helpless. Also, if these institutions can themselves be dictatorially
controlled by the central regime or replaced by new controlled ones,
they can be used to dominate both the individual members and also
those areas of the society.
However, if the autonomy and freedom of these independent
civil institutions (outside of government control) can be maintained
or regained they are highly important for the application of politi-
cal defiance. The common feature of the cited examples in which
dictatorships have been disintegrated or weakened has been the
courageous mass application of political defiance by the population
and its institutions.
As stated, these centers of power provide the institutional bases
from which the population can exert pressure or can resist dictato-
rial controls. In the future, they will be part of the indispensable
structural base for a free society. Their continued independence
and growth therefore is often a prerequisite for the success of the
liberation struggle.
If the dictatorship has been largely successful in destroying or
controlling the society’s independent bodies, it will be important for
From Dictatorship to Democracy 23
the resisters to create new independent social groups and institu-
tions, or to reassert democratic control over surviving or partially
controlled bodies. During the Hungarian Revolution of 1956-1957
a multitude of direct democracy councils emerged, even joining
together to establish for some weeks a whole federated system of
institutions and governance. In Poland during the late 1980s work-
ers maintained illegal Solidarity unions and, in some cases, took
over control of the official, Communist-dominated, trade unions.
Such institutional developments can have very important political
consequences.
Of course, none of this means that weakening and destroying
dictatorships is easy, nor that every attempt will succeed. It certainly
does not mean that the struggle will be free of casualties, for those
still serving the dictators are likely to fight back in an effort to force
the populace to resume cooperation and obedience.
The above insight into power does mean, however, that the deliberate
disintegration of dictatorships is possible. Dictatorships in particular
have specific characteristics that render them highly vulnerable
to skillfully implemented political defiance. Let us examine these
characteristics in more detail.

F
our
Dictatorships have weaknesses
Dictatorships often appear invulnerable. Intelligence agencies,
police, military forces, prisons, concentration camps, and execu-
tion squads are controlled by a powerful few. A country’s finances,
natural resources, and production capacities are often arbitrarily
plundered by dictators and used to support the dictators’ will.
In comparison, democratic opposition forces often appear
extremely weak, ineffective, and powerless. That perception of
invulnerability against powerlessness makes effective opposition
unlikely.
That is not the whole story, however.
identifying the achilles’ heel
A myth from Classical Greece illustrates well the vulnerability of
the supposedly invulnerable. Against the warrior Achilles, no blow
would injure and no sword would penetrate his skin. When still a
baby, Achilles’ mother had supposedly dipped him into the waters
of the magical river Styx, resulting in the protection of his body from
all dangers. There was, however, a problem. Since the baby was
held by his heel so that he would not be washed away, the magical
water had not covered that small part of his body. When Achilles
was a grown man he appeared to all to be invulnerable to the en-
emies’ weapons. However, in the battle against Troy, instructed by
one who knew the weakness, an enemy soldier aimed his arrow at
Achilles’ unprotected heel, the one spot where he could be injured.
The strike proved fatal. Still today, the phrase “Achilles’ heel” refers
to the vulnerable part of a person, a plan, or an institution at which
if attacked there is no protection.
The same principle applies to ruthless dictatorships. They, too,
can be conquered, but most quickly and with least cost if their weak-
nesses can be identified and the attack concentrated on them.
25
26 Gene Sharp
Weaknesses of dictatorships
Among the weaknesses of dictatorships are the following:
1. The cooperation of a multitude of people, groups, and insti-
tutions needed to operate the system may be restricted or
withdrawn.
2. The requirements and effects of the regime’s past policies
will somewhat limit its present ability to adopt and imple-
ment conflicting policies.
3. The system may become routine in its operation, less able to
adjust quickly to new situations.
4. Personnel and resources already allocated for existing tasks
will not be easily available for new needs.
5. Subordinates fearful of displeasing their superiors may not
report accurate or complete information needed by the dic-
tators to make decisions.
6. The ideology may erode, and myths and symbols of the sys-
tem may become unstable.
7. If a strong ideology is present that influences one’s view of
reality, firm adherence to it may cause inattention to actual
conditions and needs.
8. Deteriorating efficiency and competency of the bureaucracy,
or excessive controls and regulations, may make the system’s
policies and operation ineffective.
9. Internal institutional conflicts and personal rivalries and hos-
tilities may harm, and even disrupt, the operation of the dic-
tatorship.
From Dictatorship to Democracy 27
10. Intellectuals and students may become restless in response
to conditions, restrictions, doctrinalism, and repression.
11. The general public may over time become apathetic, skepti-
cal, and even hostile to the regime.
12. Regional, class, cultural, or national differences may become
acute.
13. The power hierarchy of the dictatorship is always unstable
to some degree, and at times extremely so. Individuals do
not only remain in the same position in the ranking, but may
rise or fall to other ranks or be removed entirely and replaced
by new persons.
14. Sections of the police or military forces may act to achieve
their own objectives, even against the will of established dic-
tators, including by coup d’état.
15. If the dictatorship is new, time is required for it to become
well established.
16. With so many decisions made by so few people in the dicta-
torship, mistakes of judgment, policy, and action are likely
to occur.
17. If the regime seeks to avoid these dangers and decentral-
izes controls and decision making, its control over the cen-
tral levers of power may be further eroded.
attacking weaknesses of dictatorships
With knowledge of such inherent weaknesses, the democratic op-
position can seek to aggravate these “Achilles’ heels” deliberately
in order to alter the system drastically or to disintegrate it.
The conclusion is then clear: despite the appearances of strength,
28 Gene Sharp
all dictatorships have weaknesses, internal inefficiencies, personal
rivalries, institutional inefficiencies, and conflicts between organiza-
tions and departments. These weaknesses, over time, tend to make
the regime less effective and more vulnerable to changing conditions
and deliberate resistance. Not everything the regime sets out to ac-
complish will get completed. At times, for example, even Hitler’s
direct orders were never implemented because those beneath him in
the hierarchy refused to carry them out. The dictatorial regime may
at times even fall apart quickly, as we have already observed.
This does not mean dictatorships can be destroyed without risks
and casualties. Every possible course of action for liberation will
involve risks and potential suffering, and will take time to operate.
And, of course, no means of action can ensure rapid success in every
situation. However, types of struggle that target the dictatorship’s
identifiable weaknesses have greater chance of success than those
that seek to fight the dictatorship where it is clearly strongest. The
question is how this struggle is to be waged.
F
ive
exercising power
In Chapter One we noted that military resistance against dictator-
ships does not strike them where they are weakest, but rather where
they are strongest. By choosing to compete in the areas of military
forces, supplies of ammunition, weapons technology, and the like,
resistance movements tend to put themselves at a distinct disadvan-
tage. Dictatorships will almost always be able to muster superior
resources in these areas. The dangers of relying on foreign powers
for salvation were also outlined. In Chapter Two we examined the
problems of relying on negotiations as a means to remove dictator-
ships.
What means are then available that will offer the democratic
resistance distinct advantages and will tend to aggravate the iden-
tified weaknesses of dictatorships? What technique of action will
capitalize on the theory of political power discussed in Chapter
Three? The alternative of choice is political defiance.
Political defiance has the following characteristics:
• It does not accept that the outcome will be decided by the
means of fighting chosen by the dictatorship.
• It is difficult for the regime to combat.
• It can uniquely aggravate weaknesses of the dictatorship and
can sever its sources of power.
• It can in action be widely dispersed but can also be concen-
trated on a specific objective.
• It leads to errors of judgment and action by the dictators.
29
30 Gene Sharp
• It can effectively utilize the population as a whole and the
society’s groups and institutions in the struggle to end the
brutal domination of the few.
• It helps to spread the distribution of effective power in the
society, making the establishment and maintenance of a
democratic society more possible.
the workings of nonviolent struggle
Like military capabilities, political defiance can be employed for a
variety of purposes, ranging from efforts to influence the opponents
to take different actions, to create conditions for a peaceful resolu-
tion of conflict, or to disintegrate the opponents’ regime. However,
political defiance operates in quite different ways from violence.
Although both techniques are means to wage struggle, they do so
with very different means and with different consequences. The
ways and results of violent conflict are well known. Physical weap-
ons are used to intimidate, injure, kill, and destroy.
Nonviolent struggle is a much more complex and varied
means of struggle than is violence. Instead, the struggle is fought
by psychological, social, economic, and political weapons applied
by the population and the institutions of the society. These have
been known under various names of protests, strikes, noncoopera-
tion, boycotts, disaffection, and people power. As noted earlier, all
governments can rule only as long as they receive replenishment of
the needed sources of their power from the cooperation, submission,
and obedience of the population and the institutions of the society.
Political defiance, unlike violence, is uniquely suited to severing
those sources of power.
nonviolent weapons and discipline
The common error of past improvised political defiance campaigns
is the reliance on only one or two methods, such as strikes and mass
demonstrations. In fact, a multitude of methods exist that allow
From Dictatorship to Democracy 31
resistance strategists to concentrate and disperse resistance as re-
quired.
About two hundred specific methods of nonviolent action have
been identified, and there are certainly scores more. These methods
are classified under three broad categories: protest and persuasion,
noncooperation, and intervention. Methods of nonviolent protest
and persuasion are largely symbolic demonstrations, including pa-
rades, marches, and vigils (54 methods). Noncooperation is divided
into three sub-categories: (a) social noncooperation (16 methods),
(b) economic noncooperation, including boycotts (26 methods) and
strikes (23 methods), and (c) political noncooperation (38 methods).
Nonviolent intervention, by psychological, physical, social, econom-
ic, or political means, such as the fast, nonviolent occupation, and
parallel government (41 methods), is the final group. A list of 198 of
these methods is included as the Appendix to this publication.
The use of a considerable number of these methods — carefully
chosen, applied persistently and on a large scale, wielded in the
context of a wise strategy and appropriate tactics, by trained civil-
ians — is likely to cause any illegitimate regime severe problems.
This applies to all dictatorships.
In contrast to military means, the methods of nonviolent strug-
gle can be focused directly on the issues at stake. For example, since
the issue of dictatorship is primarily political, then political forms of
nonviolent struggle would be crucial. These would include denial
of legitimacy to the dictators and noncooperation with their regime.
Noncooperation would also be applied against specific policies. At
times stalling and procrastination may be quietly and even secretly
practiced, while at other times open disobedience and defiant public
demonstrations and strikes may be visible to all.
On the other hand, if the dictatorship is vulnerable to economic
pressures or if many of the popular grievances against it are eco-
nomic, then economic action, such as boycotts or strikes, may be
appropriate resistance methods. The dictators’ efforts to exploit the
economic system might be met with limited general strikes, slow-
downs, and refusal of assistance by (or disappearance of) indispens-
32 Gene Sharp
able experts. Selective use of various types of strikes may be con-
ducted at key points in manufacturing, in transport, in the supply
of raw materials, and in the distribution of products.
Some methods of nonviolent struggle require people to perform
acts unrelated to their normal lives, such as distributing leaflets,
operating an underground press, going on hunger strike, or sitting
down in the streets. These methods may be difficult for some people
to undertake except in very extreme situations.
Other methods of nonviolent struggle instead require people
to continue approximately their normal lives, though in somewhat
different ways. For example, people may report for work, instead
of striking, but then deliberately work more slowly or inefficiently
than usual. “Mistakes” may be consciously made more frequently.
One may become “sick” and “unable” to work at certain times. Or,
one may simply refuse to work. One might go to religious services
when the act expresses not only religious but also political convic-
tions. One may act to protect children from the attackers’ propaganda
by education at home or in illegal classes. One might refuse to join
certain “recommended” or required organizations that one would
not have joined freely in earlier times. The similarity of such types
of action to people’s usual activities and the limited degree of depar-
ture from their normal lives may make participation in the national
liberation struggle much easier for many people.
Since nonviolent struggle and violence operate in fundamen-
tally different ways, even limited resistance violence during a po-
litical defiance campaign will be counterproductive, for it will shift
the struggle to one in which the dictators have an overwhelming
advantage (military warfare). Nonviolent discipline is a key to suc-
cess and must be maintained despite provocations and brutalities
by the dictators and their agents.
The maintenance of nonviolent discipline against violent op-
ponents facilitates the workings of the four mechanisms of change
in nonviolent struggle (discussed below). Nonviolent discipline is
also extremely important in the process of political jiu-jitsu. In this
process the stark brutality of the regime against the clearly nonvio-
lent actionists politically rebounds against the dictators’ position,
From Dictatorship to Democracy 33
causing dissention in their own ranks as well as fomenting support
for the resisters among the general population, the regime’s usual
supporters, and third parties.
In some cases, however, limited violence against the dictator-
ship may be inevitable. Frustration and hatred of the regime may
explode into violence. Or, certain groups may be unwilling to aban-
don violent means even though they recognize the important role of
nonviolent struggle. In these cases, political defiance does not need to
be abandoned. However, it will be necessary to separate the violent
action as far as possible from the nonviolent action. This should be
done in terms of geography, population groups, timing, and issues.
Otherwise the violence could have a disastrous effect on the poten-
tially much more powerful and successful use of political defiance.
The historical record indicates that while casualties in dead
and wounded must be expected in political defiance, they will be
far fewer than the casualties in military warfare. Furthermore, this
type of struggle does not contribute to the endless cycle of killing
and brutality.
Nonviolent struggle both requires and tends to produce a loss
(or greater control) of fear of the government and its violent repres-
sion. That abandonment or control of fear is a key element in destroy-
ing the power of the dictators over the general population.
openness, secrecy, and high standards
Secrecy, deception, and underground conspiracy pose very diffi-
cult problems for a movement using nonviolent action. It is often
impossible to keep the political police and intelligence agents from
learning about intentions and plans. From the perspective of the
movement, secrecy is not only rooted in fear but contributes to fear,
which dampens the spirit of resistance and reduces the number of
people who can participate in a given action. It also can contribute
to suspicions and accusations, often unjustified, within the move-
ment, concerning who is an informer or agent for the opponents.
Secrecy may also affect the ability of a movement to remain nonvio-
34 Gene Sharp
lent. In contrast, openness regarding intentions and plans will not
only have the opposite effects, but will contribute to an image that
the resistance movement is in fact extremely powerful. The problem
is of course more complex than this suggests, and there are signifi-
cant aspects of resistance activities that may require secrecy. A well-
informed assessment will be required by those knowledgeable about
both the dynamics of nonviolent struggle and also the dictatorship’s
means of surveillance in the specific situation.
The editing, printing, and distribution of underground publica-
tions, the use of illegal radio broadcasts from within the country, and
the gathering of intelligence about the operations of the dictatorship
are among the special limited types of activities where a high degree
of secrecy will be required.
The maintenance of high standards of behavior in nonviolent
action is necessary at all stages of the conflict. Such factors as fearless-
ness and maintaining nonviolent discipline are always required. It is
important to remember that large numbers of people may frequently
be necessary to effect particular changes. However, such numbers
can be obtained as reliable participants only by maintaining the high
standards of the movement.
shifting power relationships
Strategists need to remember that the conflict in which political defi-
ance is applied is a constantly changing field of struggle with continu-
ing interplay of moves and countermoves. Nothing is static. Power
relationships, both absolute and relative, are subject to constant and
rapid changes. This is made possible by the resisters continuing their
nonviolent persistence despite repression.
The variations in the respective power of the contending sides
in this type of conflict situation are likely to be more extreme than in
violent conflicts, to take place more quickly, and to have more diverse
and politically significant consequences. Due to these variations,
specific actions by the resisters are likely to have consequences far
beyond the particular time and place in which they occur. These ef-
fects will rebound to strengthen or weaken one group or another.
From Dictatorship to Democracy 35
In addition, the nonviolent group may, by its actions exert in-
fluence over the increase or decrease in the relative strength of the
opponent group to a great extent. For example, disciplined courageous
nonviolent resistance in face of the dictators’ brutalities may induce
unease, disaffection, unreliability, and in extreme situations even
mutiny among the dictators’ own soldiers and population. This
resistance may also result in increased international condemnation
of the dictatorship. In addition, skillful, disciplined, and persistent
use of political defiance may result in more and more participation in
the resistance by people who normally would give their tacit support
to the dictators or generally remain neutral in the conflict.
Four mechanisms of change
Nonviolent struggle produces change in four ways. The first
mechanism is the least likely, though it has occurred. When mem-
bers of the opponent group are emotionally moved by the suffering
of repression imposed on courageous nonviolent resisters or are
rationally persuaded that the resisters’ cause is just, they may come
to accept the resisters’ aims. This mechanism is called conversion.
Though cases of conversion in nonviolent action do sometimes hap-
pen, they are rare, and in most conflicts this does not occur at all or
at least not on a significant scale.
Far more often, nonviolent struggle operates by changing the
conflict situation and the society so that the opponents simply cannot
do as they like. It is this change that produces the other three mecha-
nisms: accommodation, nonviolent coercion, and disintegration.
Which of these occurs depends on the degree to which the relative
and absolute power relations are shifted in favor of the democrats.
If the issues are not fundamental ones, the demands of the op-
position in a limited campaign are not considered threatening, and
the contest of forces has altered the power relationships to some
degree, the immediate conflict may be ended by reaching an agree-
ment, a splitting of differences or compromise. This mechanism is
36 Gene Sharp
called accommodation. Many strikes are settled in this manner, for
example, with both sides attaining some of their objectives but nei-
ther achieving all it wanted. A government may perceive such a
settlement to have some positive benefits, such as defusing tension,
creating an impression of “fairness,” or polishing the international
image of the regime. It is important, therefore, that great care be
exercised in selecting the issues on which a settlement by accom-
modation is acceptable. A struggle to bring down a dictatorship is
not one of these.
Nonviolent struggle can be much more powerful than indicated
by the mechanisms of conversion or accommodation. Mass nonco-
operation and defiance can so change social and political situations,
especially power relationships, that the dictators’ ability to control
the economic, social, and political processes of government and the
society is in fact taken away. The opponents’ military forces may be-
come so unreliable that they no longer simply obey orders to repress
resisters. Although the opponents’ leaders remain in their positions,
and adhere to their original goals, their ability to act effectively has
been taken away from them. That is called nonviolent coercion.
In some extreme situations, the conditions producing nonviolent
coercion are carried still further. The opponents’ leadership in fact
loses all ability to act and their own structure of power collapses.
The resisters’ self-direction, noncooperation, and defiance become so
complete that the opponents now lack even a semblance of control
over them. The opponents’ bureaucracy refuses to obey its own lead-
ership. The opponents’ troops and police mutiny. The opponents’
usual supporters or population repudiate their former leadership,
denying that they have any right to rule at all. Hence, their former
assistance and obedience falls away. The fourth mechanism of
change, disintegration of the opponents’ system, is so complete that
they do not even have sufficient power to surrender. The regime
simply falls to pieces.
In planning liberation strategies, these four mechanisms should
be kept in mind. They sometimes operate essentially by chance.
However, the selection of one or more of these as the intended mecha-
From Dictatorship to Democracy 37
nism of change in a conflict will make it possible to formulate spe-
cific and mutually reinforcing strategies. Which mechanism (or
mechanisms) to select will depend on numerous factors, including
the absolute and relative power of the contending groups and the
attitudes and objectives of the nonviolent struggle group.
Democratizing effects of political defiance
In contrast to the centralizing effects of violent sanctions, use of the
technique of nonviolent struggle contributes to democratizing the
political society in several ways.
One part of the democratizing effect is negative. That is, in
contrast to military means, this technique does not provide a means
of repression under command of a ruling elite which can be turned
against the population to establish or maintain a dictatorship. Lead-
ers of a political defiance movement can exert influence and apply
pressures on their followers, but they cannot imprison or execute
them when they dissent or choose other leaders.
Another part of the democratizing effect is positive. That is,
nonviolent struggle provides the population with means of resistance
that can be used to achieve and defend their liberties against existing
or would-be dictators. Below are several of the positive democratiz-
ing effects nonviolent struggle may have:
• Experience in applying nonviolent struggle may result in the
population being more self-confident in challenging the
regime’s threats and capacity for violent repression.
• Nonviolent struggle provides the means of noncooperation
and defiance by which the population can resist undemo-
cratic controls over them by any dictatorial group.
• Nonviolent struggle can be used to assert the practice of
democratic freedoms, such as free speech, free press, inde-
pendent organizations, and free assembly, in face of repres-
sive controls.
38 Gene Sharp
• Nonviolent struggle contributes strongly to the survival, re-
birth, and strengthening of the independent groups and in-
stitutions of the society, as previously discussed. These are
important for democracy because of their capacity to mobi-
lize the power capacity of the population and to impose lim-
its on the effective power of any would-be dictators.
• Nonviolent struggle provides means by which the popula-
tion can wield power against repressive police and military
action by a dictatorial government.
• Nonviolent struggle provides methods by which the popu-
lation and the independent institutions can in the interests
of democracy restrict or sever the sources of power for the
ruling elite, thereby threatening its capacity to continue its
domination.
complexity of nonviolent struggle
As we have seen from this discussion, nonviolent struggle is a com-
plex technique of social action, involving a multitude of methods,
a range of mechanisms of change, and specific behavioral require-
ments. To be effective, especially against a dictatorship, political
defiance requires careful planning and preparation. Prospective
participants will need to understand what is required of them.
Resources will need to have been made available. And strategists
will need to have analyzed how nonviolent struggle can be most
effectively applied. We now turn our attention to this latter crucial
element: the need for strategic planning.
s
ix
the neeD For strategic planning
Political defiance campaigns against dictatorships may begin in a
variety of ways. In the past these struggles have almost always been
unplanned and essentially accidental. Specific grievances that have
triggered past initial actions have varied widely, but often included
new brutalities, the arrest or killing of a highly regarded person, a
new repressive policy or order, food shortages, disrespect toward
religious beliefs, or an anniversary of an important related event.
Sometimes, a particular act by the dictatorship has so enraged the
populace that they have launched into action without having any
idea how the rising might end. At other times a courageous indi-
vidual or a small group may have taken action which aroused sup-
port. A specific grievance may be recognized by others as similar
to wrongs they had experienced and they, too, may thus join the
struggle. Sometimes, a specific call for resistance from a small group
or individual may meet an unexpectedly large response.
While spontaneity has some positive qualities, it has often
had disadvantages. Frequently, the democratic resisters have not
anticipated the brutalities of the dictatorship, so that they suffered
gravely and the resistance has collapsed. At times the lack of plan-
ning by democrats has left crucial decisions to chance, with disastrous
results. Even when the oppressive system was brought down, lack
of planning on how to handle the transition to a democratic system
has contributed to the emergence of a new dictatorship.
realistic planning
In the future, unplanned popular action will undoubtedly play sig-
nificant roles in risings against dictatorships. However, it is now
possible to calculate the most effective ways to bring down a dicta-
torship, to assess when the political situation and popular mood are
ripe, and to choose how to initiate a campaign. Very careful thought
based on a realistic assessment of the situation and the capabilities of
39
40 Gene Sharp
the populace is required in order to select effective ways to achieve
freedom under such circumstances.
If one wishes to accomplish something, it is wise to plan how to
do it. The more important the goal, or the graver the consequences
of failure, the more important planning becomes. Strategic plan-
ning increases the likelihood that all available resources will be
mobilized and employed most effectively. This is especially true for
a democratic movement – which has limited material resources and
whose supporters will be in danger – that is trying to bring down
a powerful dictatorship. In contrast, the dictatorship usually will
have access to vast material resources, organizational strength, and
ability to perpetrate brutalities.
“To plan a strategy” here means to calculate a course of action
that will make it more likely to get from the present to the desired
future situation. In terms of this discussion, it means from a dic-
tatorship to a future democratic system. A plan to achieve that
objective will usually consist of a phased series of campaigns and
other organized activities designed to strengthen the oppressed
population and society and to weaken the dictatorship. Note here
that the objective is not simply to destroy the current dictatorship
but to emplace a democratic system. A grand strategy that limits
its objective to merely destroying the incumbent dictatorship runs
a great risk of producing another tyrant.
hurdles to planning
Some exponents of freedom in various parts of the world do not
bring their full capacities to bear on the problem of how to achieve
liberation. Only rarely do these advocates fully recognize the
extreme importance of careful strategic planning before they act.
Consequently, this is almost never done.
Why is it that the people who have the vision of bringing po-
litical freedom to their people should so rarely prepare a compre-
hensive strategic plan to achieve that goal? Unfortunately, often
most people in democratic opposition groups do not understand
the need for strategic planning or are not accustomed or trained to
From Dictatorship to Democracy 41
think strategically. This is a difficult task. Constantly harassed by
the dictatorship, and overwhelmed by immediate responsibilities,
resistance leaders often do not have the safety or time to develop
strategic thinking skills.
Instead, it is a common pattern simply to react to the initiatives
of the dictatorship. The opposition is then always on the defensive,
seeking to maintain limited liberties or bastions of freedom, at best
slowing the advance of the dictatorial controls or causing certain
problems for the regime’s new policies.
Some individuals and groups, of course, may not see the need
for broad long-term planning of a liberation movement. Instead, they
may naïvely think that if they simply espouse their goal strongly,
firmly, and long enough, it will somehow come to pass. Others as-
sume that if they simply live and witness according to their principles
and ideals in face of difficulties, they are doing all they can to imple-
ment them. The espousal of humane goals and loyalty to ideals are
admirable, but are grossly inadequate to end a dictatorship and to
achieve freedom.
Other opponents of dictatorship may naïvely think that if only
they use enough violence, freedom will come. But, as noted earlier,
violence is no guarantor of success. Instead of liberation, it can lead
to defeat, massive tragedy, or both. In most situations the dictator-
ship is best equipped for violent struggle and the military realities
rarely, if ever, favor the democrats.
There are also activists who base their actions on what they
“feel” they should do. These approaches are, however, not only
egocentric but they offer no guidance for developing a grand strat-
egy of liberation.
Action based on a “bright idea” that someone has had is also
limited. What is needed instead is action based on careful calcula-
tion of the “next steps” required to topple the dictatorship. Without
strategic analysis, resistance leaders will often not know what that
“next step” should be, for they have not thought carefully about the
successive specific steps required to achieve victory. Creativity and
bright ideas are very important, but they need to be utilized in order
to advance the strategic situation of the democratic forces.
42 Gene Sharp
Acutely aware of the multitude of actions that could be taken
against the dictatorship and unable to determine where to begin,
some people counsel “Do everything simultaneously.” That might
be helpful but, of course, is impossible, especially for relatively weak
movements. Furthermore, such an approach provides no guidance
on where to begin, on where to concentrate efforts, and how to use
often limited resources.
Other persons and groups may see the need for some planning,
but are only able to think about it on a short-term or tactical basis.
They may not see that longer-term planning is necessary or possible.
They may at times be unable to think and analyze in strategic terms,
allowing themselves to be repeatedly distracted by relatively small
issues, often responding to the opponents’ actions rather than seiz-
ing the initiative for the democratic resistance. Devoting so much
energy to short-term activities, these leaders often fail to explore
several alternative courses of action which could guide the overall
efforts so that the goal is constantly approached.
It is also just possible that some democratic movements do
not plan a comprehensive strategy to bring down the dictatorship,
concentrating instead only on immediate issues, for another reason.
Inside themselves, they do not really believe that the dictatorship
can be ended by their own efforts. Therefore, planning how to do
so is considered to be a romantic waste of time or an exercise in
futility. People struggling for freedom against established brutal
dictatorships are often confronted by such immense military and
police power that it appears the dictators can accomplish whatever
they will. Lacking real hope, these people will, nevertheless, defy
the dictatorship for reasons of integrity and perhaps history. Though
they will never admit it, perhaps never consciously recognize it, their
actions appear to themselves as hopeless. Hence, for them, long-term
comprehensive strategic planning has no merit.
The result of such failures to plan strategically is often drastic:
one’s strength is dissipated, one’s actions are ineffective, energy is
wasted on minor issues, advantages are not utilized, and sacrifices
are for naught. If democrats do not plan strategically they are likely
to fail to achieve their objectives. A poorly planned, odd mixture of
From Dictatorship to Democracy 43
activities will not move a major resistance effort forward. Instead,
it will more likely allow the dictatorship to increase its controls and
power.
Unfortunately, because comprehensive strategic plans for libera-
tion are rarely, if ever, developed, dictatorships appear much more
durable than they in fact are. They survive for years or decades
longer than need be the case.
Four important terms in strategic planning
In order to help us to think strategically, clarity about the meanings
of four basic terms is important.
Grand strategy is the conception that serves to coordinate and
direct the use of all appropriate and available resources (economic,
human, moral, political, organizational, etc.) of a group seeking to
attain its objectives in a conflict.
Grand strategy, by focusing primary attention on the group’s
objectives and resources in the conflict, determines the most appro-
priate technique of action (such as conventional military warfare or
nonviolent struggle) to be employed in the conflict. In planning a
grand strategy resistance leaders must evaluate and plan which pres-
sures and influences are to be brought to bear upon the opponents.
Further, grand strategy will include decisions on the appropriate
conditions and timing under which initial and subsequent resistance
campaigns will be launched.
Grand strategy sets the basic framework for the selection of
more limited strategies for waging the struggle. Grand strategy also
determines the allocation of general tasks to particular groups and
the distribution of resources to them for use in the struggle.
Strategy is the conception of how best to achieve particular ob-
jectives in a conflict, operating within the scope of the chosen grand
strategy. Strategy is concerned with whether, when, and how to fight,
as well as how to achieve maximum effectiveness in struggling for
certain ends. A strategy has been compared to the artist’s concept,
while a strategic plan is the architect’s blueprint.12
12 Robert Helvey, personal communication, 15 August 1993.
44 Gene Sharp
Strategy may also include efforts to develop a strategic situa-
tion that is so advantageous that the opponents are able to foresee
that open conflict is likely to bring their certain defeat, and there-
fore capitulate without an open struggle. Or, if not, the improved
strategic situation will make success of the challengers certain in
struggle. Strategy also involves how to act to make good use of
successes when gained.
Applied to the course of the struggle itself, the strategic plan is
the basic idea of how a campaign shall develop, and how its separate
components shall be fitted together to contribute most advanta-
geously to achieve its objectives. It involves the skillful deployment
of particular action groups in smaller operations. Planning for a
wise strategy must take into consideration the requirements for suc-
cess in the operation of the chosen technique of struggle. Different
techniques will have different requirements. Of course, just fulfill-
ing “requirements” is not sufficient to ensure success. Additional
factors may also be needed.
In devising strategies, the democrats must clearly define their
objectives and determine how to measure the effectiveness of efforts
to achieve them. This definition and analysis permits the strategist
to identify the precise requirements for securing each selected objec-
tive. This need for clarity and definition applies equally to tactical
planning.
Tactics and methods of action are used to implement the strat-
egy. Tactics relate to the skillful use of one’s forces to the best ad-
vantage in a limited situation. A tactic is a limited action, employed
to achieve a restricted objective. The choice of tactics is governed
by the conception of how best in a restricted phase of a conflict to
utilize the available means of fighting to implement the strategy. To
be most effective, tactics and methods must be chosen and applied
with constant attention to the achievement of strategic objectives.
Tactical gains that do not reinforce the attainment of strategic objec-
tives may in the end turn out to be wasted energy.
A tactic is thus concerned with a limited course of action that
fits within the broad strategy, just as a strategy fits within the grand
strategy. Tactics are always concerned with fighting, whereas strat-
From Dictatorship to Democracy 45
egy includes wider considerations. A particular tactic can only be
understood as part of the overall strategy of a battle or a campaign.
Tactics are applied for shorter periods of time than strategies, or in
smaller areas (geographical, institutional, etc.), or by a more limited
number of people, or for more limited objectives. In nonviolent
action the distinction between a tactical objective and a strategic
objective may be partly indicated by whether the chosen objective
of the action is minor or major.
Offensive tactical engagements are selected to support attain-
ment of strategic objectives. Tactical engagements are the tools of the
strategist in creating conditions favorable for delivering decisive at-
tacks against an opponent. It is most important, therefore, that those
given responsibility for planning and executing tactical operations be
skilled in assessing the situation, and selecting the most appropriate
methods for it. Those expected to participate must be trained in the
use of the chosen technique and the specific methods.
Method refers to the specific weapons or means of action. Within
the technique of nonviolent struggle, these include the dozens of
particular forms of action (such as the many kinds of strikes, boy-
cotts, political noncooperation, and the like) cited in Chapter Five.
(See also Appendix.)
The development of a responsible and effective strategic plan
for a nonviolent struggle depends upon the careful formulation and
selection of the grand strategy, strategies, tactics, and methods.
The main lesson of this discussion is that a calculated use of
one’s intellect is required in careful strategic planning for liberation
from a dictatorship. Failure to plan intelligently can contribute to
disasters, while the effective use of one’s intellectual capacities can
chart a strategic course that will judiciously utilize one’s available
resources to move the society toward the goal of liberty and democ-
racy.

s
even
planning strategy
In order to increase the chances for success, resistance leaders
will need to formulate a comprehensive plan of action capable of
strengthening the suffering people, weakening and then destroy-
ing the dictatorship, and building a durable democracy. To achieve
such a plan of action, a careful assessment of the situation and of the
options for effective action is needed. Out of such a careful analysis
both a grand strategy and the specific campaign strategies for achiev-
ing freedom can be developed. Though related, the development of
grand strategy and campaign strategies are two separate processes.
Only after the grand strategy has been developed can the specific
campaign strategies be fully developed. Campaign strategies will
need to be designed to achieve and reinforce the grand strategic
objectives.
The development of resistance strategy requires attention to
many questions and tasks. Here we shall identify some of the im-
portant factors that need to be considered, both at the grand strate-
gic level and the level of campaign strategy. All strategic planning,
however, requires that the resistance planners have a profound
understanding of the entire conflict situation, including attention to
physical, historical, governmental, military, cultural, social, political,
psychological, economic, and international factors. Strategies can
only be developed in the context of the particular struggle and its
background.
Of primary importance, democratic leaders and strategic plan-
ners will want to assess the objectives and importance of the cause.
Are the objectives worth a major struggle, and why? It is critical to
determine the real objective of the struggle. We have argued here
that overthrow of the dictatorship or removal of the present dicta-
tors is not enough. The objective in these conflicts needs to be the
establishment of a free society with a democratic system of govern-
ment. Clarity on this point will influence the development of a grand
strategy and of the ensuing specific strategies.
47
48 Gene Sharp
Particularly, strategists will need to answer many fundamental
questions, such as these:
• What are the main obstacles to achieving freedom?
• What factors will facilitate achieving freedom?
• What are the main strengths of the dictatorship?
• What are the various weaknesses of the dictatorship?
• To what degree are the sources of power for the dictatorship
vulnerable?
• What are the strengths of the democratic forces and the gen-
eral population?
• What are the weaknesses of the democratic forces and how
can they be corrected?
• What is the status of third parties, not immediately involved
in the conflict, who already assist or might assist, either the
dictatorship or the democratic movement, and if so in what
ways?
choice of means
At the grand strategic level, planners will need to choose the main
means of struggle to be employed in the coming conflict. The merits
and limitations of several alternative techniques of struggle will need
to be evaluated, such as conventional military warfare, guerrilla
warfare, political defiance, and others.
In making this choice the strategists will need to consider such
questions as the following: Is the chosen type of struggle within
the capacities of the democrats? Does the chosen technique utilize
strengths of the dominated population? Does this technique target
From Dictatorship to Democracy 49
the weaknesses of the dictatorship, or does it strike at its strongest
points? Do the means help the democrats become more self-reliant,
or do they require dependency on third parties or external suppliers?
What is the record of the use of the chosen means in bringing down
dictatorships? Do they increase or limit the casualties and destruction
that may be incurred in the coming conflict? Assuming success in
ending the dictatorship, what effect would the selected means have
on the type of government that would arise from the struggle? The
types of action determined to be counterproductive will need to be
excluded in the developed grand strategy.
In previous chapters we have argued that political defiance
offers significant comparative advantages to other techniques of
struggle. Strategists will need to examine their particular conflict
situation and determine whether political defiance provides affirma-
tive answers to the above questions.
planning for democracy
It should be remembered that against a dictatorship the objective of
the grand strategy is not simply to bring down the dictators but to
install a democratic system and make the rise of a new dictatorship
impossible. To accomplish these objectives, the chosen means of
struggle will need to contribute to a change in the distribution of
effective power in the society. Under the dictatorship the popula-
tion and civil institutions of the society have been too weak, and the
government too strong. Without a change in this imbalance, a new
set of rulers can, if they wish, be just as dictatorial as the old ones.
A “palace revolution” or a coup d’état therefore is not welcome.
Political defiance contributes to a more equitable distribution
of effective power through the mobilization of the society against
the dictatorship, as was discussed in Chapter Five. This process
occurs in several ways. The development of a nonviolent struggle
capacity means that the dictatorship’s capacity for violent repression
no longer as easily produces intimidation and submission among
the population. The population will have at its disposal power-
ful means to counter and at times block the exertion of the dicta-
50 Gene Sharp
tors’ power. Further, the mobilization of popular power through
political defiance will strengthen the independent institutions of
the society. The experience of once exercising effective power is
not quickly forgot. The knowledge and skill gained in struggle will
make the population less likely to be easily dominated by would-be
dictators. This shift in power relationships would ultimately make
establishment of a durable democratic society much more likely.
external assistance
As part of the preparation of a grand strategy it is necessary to as-
sess what will be the relative roles of internal resistance and external
pressures for disintegrating the dictatorship. In this analysis we have
argued that the main force of the struggle must be borne from inside
the country itself. To the degree that international assistance comes
at all, it will be stimulated by the internal struggle.
As a modest supplement, efforts can be made to mobilize world
public opinion against the dictatorship, on humanitarian, moral, and
religious grounds. Efforts can be taken to obtain diplomatic, political,
and economic sanctions by governments and international organiza-
tions against the dictatorship. These may take the forms of economic
and military weapons embargoes, reduction in levels of diplomatic
recognition or the breaking of diplomatic ties, banning of economic
assistance and prohibition of investments in the dictatorial country,
expulsion of the dictatorial government from various international
organizations and from United Nations bodies. Further, international
assistance, such as the provision of financial and communications
support, can also be provided directly to the democratic forces.
Formulating a grand strategy
Following an assessment of the situation, the choice of means, and a
determination of the role of external assistance, planners of the grand
strategy will need to sketch in broad strokes how the conflict might
best be conducted. This broad plan would stretch from the present
to the future liberation and the institution of a democratic system.
From Dictatorship to Democracy 51
In formulating a grand strategy these planners will need to ask
themselves a variety of questions. The following questions pose (in
a more specific way than earlier) the types of considerations required
in devising a grand strategy for a political defiance struggle:
How might the long-term struggle best begin? How can the
oppressed population muster sufficient self-confidence and strength
to act to challenge the dictatorship, even initially in a limited way?
How could the population’s capacity to apply noncooperation and
defiance be increased with time and experience? What might be
the objectives of a series of limited campaigns to regain democratic
control over the society and limit the dictatorship?
Are there independent institutions that have survived the dic-
tatorship which might be used in the struggle to establish freedom?
What institutions of the society can be regained from the dictators’
control, or what institutions need to be newly created by the demo-
crats to meet their needs and establish spheres of democracy even
while the dictatorship continues?
How can organizational strength in the resistance be developed?
How can participants be trained? What resources (finances, equip-
ment, etc.) will be required throughout the struggle? What types of
symbolism can be most effective in mobilizing the population?
By what kinds of action and in what stages could the sources
of power of the dictators be incrementally weakened and severed?
How can the resisting population simultaneously persist in its defi-
ance and also maintain the necessary nonviolent discipline? How
can the society continue to meet its basic needs during the course of
the struggle? How can social order be maintained in the midst of
the conflict? As victory approaches, how can the democratic resis-
tance continue to build the institutional base of the post-dictatorship
society to make the transition as smooth as possible?
It must be remembered that no single blueprint exists or can be
created to plan strategy for every liberation movement against dic-
tatorships. Each struggle to bring down a dictatorship and establish
a democratic system will be somewhat different. No two situations
will be exactly alike, each dictatorship will have some individual
characteristics, and the capacities of the freedom-seeking population
52 Gene Sharp
will vary. Planners of grand strategy for a political defiance struggle
will require a profound understanding not only of their specific
conflict situation, but of their chosen means of struggle as well.13
When the grand strategy of the struggle has been carefully
planned there are sound reasons for making it widely known. The
large numbers of people required to participate may be more willing
and able to act if they understand the general conception, as well
as specific instructions. This knowledge could potentially have a
very positive effect on their morale, their willingness to participate,
and to act appropriately. The general outlines of the grand strategy
would become known to the dictators in any case and knowledge
of its features potentially could lead them to be less brutal in their
repression, knowing that it could rebound politically against them-
selves. Awareness of the special characteristics of the grand strategy
could potentially also contribute to dissension and defections from
the dictators’ own camp.
Once a grand strategic plan for bringing down the dictator-
ship and establishing a democratic system has been adopted, it is
important for the pro-democracy groups to persist in applying it.
Only in very rare circumstances should the struggle depart from
the initial grand strategy. When there is abundant evidence that the
chosen grand strategy was misconceived, or that the circumstances
of the struggle have fundamentally changed, planners may need to
alter the grand strategy. Even then, this should be done only after a
basic reassessment has been made and a new more adequate grand
strategic plan has been developed and adopted.
13 Recommended full length studies are Gene Sharp, The Politics of Nonviolent Action
of Nonviolent Action, (Boston, Massachusetts: Porter Sargent, 1973) and Peter Acker-
man and Christopher Kruegler, Strategic Nonviolent Conflict, (Westport, Connecticut:
Praeger, 1994). Also see Gene Sharp, Waging Nonviolent Stuggle: Twentieth Century
Practice and Twenty-First Century Potential. Boston: Porter Sargent, 2005.
From Dictatorship to Democracy 53
planning campaign strategies
However wise and promising the developed grand strategy to end
the dictatorship and to institute democracy may be, a grand strat-
egy does not implement itself. Particular strategies will need to be
developed to guide the major campaigns aimed at undermining the
dictators’ power. These strategies, in turn, will incorporate and guide
a range of tactical engagements that will aim to strike decisive blows
against the dictators’ regime. The tactics and the specific methods of
action must be chosen carefully so that they contribute to achieving
the goals of each particular strategy. The discussion here focuses
exclusively on the level of strategy.
Strategists planning the major campaigns will, like those who
planned the grand strategy, require a thorough understanding of the
nature and modes of operation of their chosen technique of struggle.
Just as military officers must understand force structures, tactics,
logistics, munitions, the effects of geography, and the like in order
to plot military strategy, political defiance planners must understand
the nature and strategic principles of nonviolent struggle. Even then,
however, knowledge of nonviolent struggle, attention to recommen-
dations in this essay, and answers to the questions posed here will
not themselves produce strategies. The formulation of strategies for
the struggle still requires an informed creativity.
In planning the strategies for the specific selective resistance
campaigns and for the longer term development of the liberation
struggle, the political defiance strategists will need to consider vari-
ous issues and problems. The following are among these:
• Determination of the specific objectives of the campaign and
their contributions to implementing the grand strategy.
• Consideration of the specific methods, or political weapons,
that can best be used to implement the chosen strategies.
Within each overall plan for a particular strategic campaign
it will be necessary to determine what smaller, tactical plans
and which specific methods of action should be used to im-
54 Gene Sharp
pose pressures and restrictions against the dictatorship’s
sources of power. It should be remembered that the achieve-
ment of major objectives will come as a result of carefully
chosen and implemented specific smaller steps.
• Determination whether, or how, economic issues should be
related to the overall essentially political struggle. If eco-
nomic issues are to be prominent in the struggle, care will be
needed that the economic grievances can actually be rem-
edied after the dictatorship is ended. Otherwise, disillusion-
ment and disaffection may set in if quick solutions are not
provided during the transition period to a democratic soci-
ety. Such disillusionment could facilitate the rise of dictato-
rial forces promising an end to economic woes.
• Determination in advance of what kind of leadership struc-
ture and communications system will work best for initiat-
ing the resistance struggle. What means of decision-making
and communication will be possible during the course of the
struggle to give continuing guidance to the resisters and the
general population?
• Communication of the resistance news to the general popu-
lation, to the dictators’ forces, and the international press.
Claims and reporting should always be strictly factual. Ex-
aggerations and unfounded claims will undermine the cred-
ibility of the resistance.
• Plans for self-reliant constructive social, educational, eco-
nomic, and political activities to meet the needs of one’s own
people during the coming conflict. Such projects can be con-
ducted by persons not directly involved in the resistance ac-
tivities.
• Determination of what kind of external assistance is desir-
able in support of the specific campaign or the general lib-
eration struggle. How can external help be best mobilized
From Dictatorship to Democracy 55
and used without making the internal struggle dependent
on uncertain external factors? Attention will need to be given
to which external groups are most likely, and most appro-
priate, to assist, such as non-governmental organizations (so-
cial movements, religious or political groups, labor unions,
etc.), governments, and/or the United Nations and its vari-
ous bodies.
Furthermore, the resistance planners will need to take measures
to preserve order and to meet social needs by one’s own forces during
mass resistance against dictatorial controls. This will not only create
alternative independent democratic structures and meet genuine
needs, but also will reduce credibility for any claims that ruthless
repression is required to halt disorder and lawlessness.
spreading the idea of noncooperation
For successful political defiance against a dictatorship, it is essential
that the population grasp the idea of noncooperation. As illustrated
by the “Monkey Master” story (see Chapter Three), the basic idea is
simple: if enough of the subordinates refuse to continue their coop-
eration long enough despite repression, the oppressive system will
be weakened and finally collapse.
People living under the dictatorship may be already familiar
with this concept from a variety of sources. Even so, the demo-
cratic forces should deliberately spread and popularize the idea
of noncooperation. The “Monkey Master” story, or a similar one,
could be disseminated throughout the society. Such a story could
be easily understood. Once the general concept of noncooperation
is grasped, people will be able to understand the relevance of future
calls to practice noncooperation with the dictatorship. They will
also be able on their own to improvise a myriad of specific forms of
noncooperation in new situations.
Despite the difficulties and dangers in attempts to commu-
nicate ideas, news, and resistance instructions while living under
dictatorships, democrats have frequently proved this to be possible.
56 Gene Sharp
Even under Nazi and Communist rule it was possible for resisters
to communicate not only with other individuals but even with large
public audiences through the production of illegal newspapers,
leaflets, books, and in later years with audio and video cassettes.
With the advantage of prior strategic planning, general guide-
lines for resistance can be prepared and disseminated. These can
indicate the issues and circumstances under which the population
should protest and withhold cooperation, and how this might be
done. Then, even if communications from the democratic leader-
ship are severed, and specific instructions have not been issued or
received, the population will know how to act on certain important
issues. Such guidelines would also provide a test to identify counter-
feit “resistance instructions” issued by the political police designed
to provoke discrediting action.
repression and countermeasures
Strategic planners will need to assess the likely responses and re-
pression, especially the threshold of violence, of the dictatorship
to the actions of the democratic resistance. It will be necessary to
determine how to withstand, counteract, or avoid this possible
increased repression without submission. Tactically, for specific
occasions, appropriate warnings to the population and the resisters
about expected repression would be in order, so that they will know
the risks of participation. If repression may be serious, preparations
for medical assistance for wounded resisters should be made.
Anticipating repression, the strategists will do well to consider
in advance the use of tactics and methods that will contribute to
achieving the specific goal of a campaign, or liberation, but that will
make brutal repression less likely or less possible. For example, street
demonstrations and parades against extreme dictatorships may be
dramatic, but they may also risk thousands of dead demonstrators.
The high cost to the demonstrators may not, however, actually ap-
ply more pressure on the dictatorship than would occur through
everyone staying home, a strike, or massive acts of noncooperation
from the civil servants.
From Dictatorship to Democracy 57
If it has been proposed that provocative resistance action
risking high casualties will be required for a strategic purpose,
then one should very carefully consider the proposal’s costs and
possible gains. Will the population and the resisters be likely to
behave in a disciplined and nonviolent manner during the course
of the struggle? Can they resist provocations to violence? Planners
must consider what measures may be taken to keep nonviolent
discipline and maintain the resistance despite brutalities. Will such
measures as pledges, policy statements, discipline leaflets, marshals
for demonstrations, and boycotts of pro-violence persons and groups
be possible and effective? Leaders should always be alert for the
presence of agents provocateurs whose mission will be to incite the
demonstrators to violence.
adhering to the strategic plan
Once a sound strategic plan is in place, the democratic forces
should not be distracted by minor moves of the dictators that may
tempt them to depart from the grand strategy and the strategy for a
particular campaign, causing them to focus major activities on unim-
portant issues. Nor should the emotions of the moment — perhaps
in response to new brutalities by the dictatorship — be allowed to
divert the democratic resistance from its grand strategy or the cam-
paign strategy. The brutalities may have been perpetrated precisely
in order to provoke the democratic forces to abandon their well-laid
plan and even to commit violent acts in order that the dictators could
more easily defeat them.
As long as the basic analysis is judged to be sound, the task of the
pro-democracy forces is to press forward stage by stage. Of course,
changes in tactics and intermediate objectives will occur and good
leaders will always be ready to exploit opportunities. These adjust-
ments should not be confused with objectives of the grand strategy
or the objectives of the specific campaign. Careful implementation of
the chosen grand strategy and of strategies for particular campaigns
will greatly contribute to success.

e
ight
applying political DeFiance
In situations in which the population feels powerless and frightened,
it is important that initial tasks for the public be low-risk, confidence-
building actions. These types of actions — such as wearing one’s
clothes in an unusual way — may publicly register a dissenting
opinion and provide an opportunity for the public to participate
significantly in acts of dissent. In other cases a relatively minor (on
the surface) nonpolitical issue (such as securing a safe water supply)
might be made the focus for group action. Strategists should choose
an issue the merits of which will be widely recognized and difficult
to reject. Success in such limited campaigns could not only correct
specific grievances but also convince the population that it indeed
has power potential.
Most of the strategies of campaigns in the long-term struggle
should not aim for the immediate complete downfall of the dictator-
ship, but instead for gaining limited objectives. Nor does every cam-
paign require the participation of all sections of the population.
In contemplating a series of specific campaigns to implement
the grand strategy, the defiance strategists need to consider how the
campaigns at the beginning, the middle, and near the conclusion of
the long-term struggle will differ from each other.
selective resistance
In the initial stages of the struggle, separate campaigns with differ-
ent specific objectives can be very useful. Such selective campaigns
may follow one after the other. Occasionally, two or three might
overlap in time.
In planning a strategy for “selective resistance” it is necessary
to identify specific limited issues or grievances that symbolize the
general oppression of the dictatorship. Such issues may be the ap-
propriate targets for conducting campaigns to gain intermediary
strategic objectives within the overall grand strategy.
59
60 Gene Sharp
These intermediary strategic objectives need to be attainable
by the current or projected power capacity of the democratic forces.
This helps to ensure a series of victories, which are good for morale,
and also contribute to advantageous incremental shifts in power
relations for the long-term struggle.
Selective resistance strategies should concentrate primarily on
specific social, economic, or political issues. These may be chosen in
order to keep some part of the social and political system out of the
dictators’ control, to regain control of some part currently controlled
by the dictators, or to deny the dictators a particular objective. If
possible, the campaign of selective resistance should also strike at
one weakness or more of the dictatorship, as already discussed.
Thereby, democrats can make the greatest possible impact with their
available power capacity.
Very early the strategists need to plan at least the strategy for the
first campaign. What are to be its limited objectives? How will it help
fulfill the chosen grand strategy? If possible, it is wise to formulate
at least the general outlines of strategies for a second and possibly
a third campaign. All such strategies will need to implement the
chosen grand strategy and operate within its general guidelines.
symbolic challenge
At the beginning of a new campaign to undermine the dictatorship,
the first more specifically political actions may be limited in scope.
They should be designed in part to test and influence the mood of
the population, and to prepare them for continuing struggle through
noncooperation and political defiance.
The initial action is likely to take the form of symbolic protest
or may be a symbolic act of limited or temporary noncooperation.
If the number of persons willing to act is small, then the initial act
might, for example, involve placing flowers at a place of symbolic
importance. On the other hand, if the number of persons willing to
act is very large, then a five minute halt to all activities or several
minutes of silence might be used. In other situations, a few indi-
From Dictatorship to Democracy 61
viduals might undertake a hunger strike, a vigil at a place of symbolic
importance, a brief student boycott of classes, or a temporary sit-in
at an important office. Under a dictatorship these more aggressive
actions would most likely be met with harsh repression.
Certain symbolic acts, such as a physical occupation in front
of the dictator’s palace or political police headquarters may involve
high risk and are therefore not advisable for initiating a campaign.
Initial symbolic protest actions have at times aroused major
national and international attention — as the mass street demonstra-
tions in Burma in 1988 or the student occupation and hunger strike
in Tiananman Square in Beijing in 1989. The high casualties of dem-
onstrators in both of these cases points to the great care strategists
must exercise in planning campaigns. Although having a tremen-
dous moral and psychological impact, such actions by themselves
are unlikely to bring down a dictatorship, for they remain largely
symbolic and do not alter the power position of the dictatorship.
It usually is not possible to sever the availability of the sources
of power to the dictators completely and rapidly at the beginning of
a struggle. That would require virtually the whole population and
almost all the institutions of the society — which had previously been
largely submissive — to reject absolutely the regime and suddenly defy
it by massive and strong noncooperation. That has not yet occurred
and would be most difficult to achieve. In most cases, therefore, a
quick campaign of full noncooperation and defiance is an unrealistic
strategy for an early campaign against the dictatorship.
spreading responsibility
During a selective resistance campaign the brunt of the struggle is
for a time usually borne by one section or more of the population.
In a later campaign with a different objective, the burden of the
struggle would be shifted to other population groups. For example,
students might conduct strikes on an educational issue, religious
leaders and believers might concentrate on a freedom of religion
issue, rail workers might meticulously obey safety regulations so as
to slow down the rail transport system, journalists might challenge
62 Gene Sharp
censorship by publishing papers with blank spaces in which prohib-
ited articles would have appeared, or police might repeatedly fail
to locate and arrest wanted members of the democratic opposition.
Phasing resistance campaigns by issue and population group will
allow certain segments of the population to rest while resistance
continues.
Selective resistance is especially important to defend the exis-
tence and autonomy of independent social, economic, and political
groups and institutions outside the control of the dictatorship, which
were briefly discussed earlier. These centers of power provide the
institutional bases from which the population can exert pressure or
can resist dictatorial controls. In the struggle, they are likely to be
among the first targets of the dictatorship.
aiming at the dictators’ power
As the long-term struggle develops beyond the initial strategies into
more ambitious and advanced phases, the strategists will need to
calculate how the dictators’ sources of power can be further restricted.
The aim would be to use popular noncooperation to create a new
more advantageous strategic situation for the democratic forces.
As the democratic resistance forces gained strength, strategists
would plot more ambitious noncooperation and defiance to sever
the dictatorships’ sources of power, with the goal of producing in-
creasing political paralysis, and in the end the disintegration of the
dictatorship itself.
It will be necessary to plan carefully how the democratic forces
can weaken the support that people and groups have previously of-
fered to the dictatorship. Will their support be weakened by revela-
tions of the brutalities perpetrated by the regime, by exposure of the
disastrous economic consequences of the dictators’ policies, or by a
new understanding that the dictatorship can be ended? The dictators’
supporters should at least be induced to become “neutral” in their
activities (“fence sitters”) or preferably to become active supporters
of the movement for democracy.
During the planning and implementation of political defiance
From Dictatorship to Democracy 63
and noncooperation, it is highly important to pay close attention
to all of the dictators’ main supporters and aides, including their
inner clique, political party, police, and bureaucrats, but especially
their army.
The degree of loyalty of the military forces, both soldiers and
officers, to the dictatorship needs to be carefully assessed and a
determination should be made as to whether the military is open
to influence by the democratic forces. Might many of the ordinary
soldiers be unhappy and frightened conscripts? Might many of the
soldiers and officers be alienated from the regime for personal, fam-
ily, or political reasons? What other factors might make soldiers and
officers vulnerable to democratic subversion?
Early in the liberation struggle a special strategy should be de-
veloped to communicate with the dictators’ troops and functionaries.
By words, symbols, and actions, the democratic forces can inform the
troops that the liberation struggle will be vigorous, determined, and
persistent. Troops should learn that the struggle will be of a special
character, designed to undermine the dictatorship but not to threaten
their lives. Such efforts would aim ultimately to undermine the morale
of the dictators’ troops and finally to subvert their loyalty and obedi-
ence in favor of the democratic movement. Similar strategies could
be aimed at the police and civil servants.
The attempt to garner sympathy from and, eventually, induce
disobedience among the dictators’ forces ought not to be interpreted,
however, to mean encouragement of the military forces to make a
quick end to the current dictatorship through military action. Such
a scenario is not likely to install a working democracy, for (as we
have discussed) a coup d’état does little to redress the imbalance of
power relations between the populace and the rulers. Therefore, it
will be necessary to plan how sympathetic military officers can be
brought to understand that neither a military coup nor a civil war
against the dictatorship is required or desirable.
Sympathetic officers can play vital roles in the democratic
struggle, such as spreading disaffection and noncooperation in the
military forces, encouraging deliberate inefficiencies and the quiet
ignoring of orders, and supporting the refusal to carry out repres-
64 Gene Sharp
sion. Military personnel may also offer various modes of positive
nonviolent assistance to the democracy movement, including safe
passage, information, food, medical supplies, and the like.
The army is one of the most important sources of the power of
dictators because it can use its disciplined military units and weap-
onry directly to attack and to punish the disobedient population.
Defiance strategists should remember that it will be exceptionally difficult,
or impossible, to disintegrate the dictatorship if the police, bureaucrats, and
military forces remain fully supportive of the dictatorship and obedient in
carrying out its commands. Strategies aimed at subverting the loyalty
of the dictators’ forces should therefore be given a high priority by
democratic strategists.
The democratic forces should remember that disaffection and
disobedience among the military forces and police can be highly
dangerous for the members of those groups. Soldiers and police
could expect severe penalties for any act of disobedience and execu-
tion for acts of mutiny. The democratic forces should not ask the
soldiers and officers that they immediately mutiny. Instead, where
communication is possible, it should be made clear that there are a
multitude of relatively safe forms of “disguised disobedience” that
they can take initially. For example, police and troops can carry out
instructions for repression inefficiently, fail to locate wanted persons,
warn resisters of impending repression, arrests, or deportations, and
fail to report important information to their superior officers. Disaf-
fected officers in turn can neglect to relay commands for repression
down the chain of command. Soldiers may shoot over the heads of
demonstrators. Similarly, for their part, civil servants can lose files
and instructions, work inefficiently, and become “ill” so that they
need to stay home until they “recover.”
shifts in strategy
The political defiance strategists will need constantly to assess how
the grand strategy and the specific campaign strategies are being
implemented. It is possible, for example, that the struggle may not
go as well as expected. In that case it will be necessary to calculate
From Dictatorship to Democracy 65
what shifts in strategy might be required. What can be done to in-
crease the movement’s strength and regain the initiative? In such
a situation, it will be necessary to identify the problem, make a
strategic reassessment, possibly shift struggle responsibilities to a
different population group, mobilize additional sources of power,
and develop alternative courses of action. When that is done, the
new plan should be implemented immediately.
Conversely, if the struggle has gone much better than expected
and the dictatorship is collapsing earlier than previously calculated,
how can the democratic forces capitalize on unexpected gains and
move toward paralyzing the dictatorship? We will explore this ques-
tion in the following chapter.

n
ine
Disintegrating the Dictatorship
The cumulative effect of well-conducted and successful political
defiance campaigns is to strengthen the resistance and to establish
and expand areas of the society where the dictatorship faces limits
on its effective control. These campaigns also provide important
experience in how to refuse cooperation and how to offer political
defiance. That experience will be of great assistance when the time
comes for noncooperation and defiance on a mass scale.
As was discussed in Chapter Three, obedience, cooperation,
and submission are essential if dictators are to be powerful. With-
out access to the sources of political power, the dictators’ power
weakens and finally dissolves. Withdrawal of support is therefore
the major required action to disintegrate a dictatorship. It may be
useful to review how the sources of power can be affected by politi-
cal defiance.
Acts of symbolic repudiation and defiance are among the avail-
able means to undermine the regime’s moral and political author-
ity — its legitimacy. The greater the regime’s authority, the greater
and more reliable is the obedience and cooperation which it will
receive. Moral disapproval needs to be expressed in action in order
to seriously threaten the existence of the dictatorship. Withdrawal
of cooperation and obedience are needed to sever the availability of
other sources of the regime’s power.
A second important such source of power is human resources,
the number and importance of the persons and groups that obey,
cooperate with, or assist the rulers. If noncooperation is practiced by
large parts of the population, the regime will be in serious trouble.
For example, if the civil servants no longer function with their normal
efficiency or even stay at home, the administrative apparatus will
be gravely affected.
Similarly, if the noncooperating persons and groups include
those that have previously supplied specialized skills and knowl-
edge, then the dictators will see their capacity to implement their
67
68 Gene Sharp
will gravely weakened. Even their ability to make well-informed
decisions and develop effective policies may be seriously reduced.
If psychological and ideological influences — called intangible
factors — that usually induce people to obey and assist the rulers
are weakened or reversed, the population will be more inclined to
disobey and to noncooperate.
The dictators’ access to material resources also directly affects
their power. With control of financial resources, the economic
system, property, natural resources, transportation, and means of
communication in the hands of actual or potential opponents of
the regime, another major source of their power is vulnerable or re-
moved. Strikes, boycotts, and increasing autonomy in the economy,
communications, and transportation will weaken the regime.
As previously discussed, the dictators’ ability to threaten or
apply sanctions — punishments against the restive, disobedient, and
noncooperative sections of the population — is a central source of
the power of dictators. This source of power can be weakened in
two ways. First, if the population is prepared, as in a war, to risk
serious consequences as the price of defiance, the effectiveness of the
available sanctions will be drastically reduced (that is, the dictators’
repression will not secure the desired submission). Second, if the
police and the military forces themselves become disaffected, they
may on an individual or mass basis evade or outright defy orders to
arrest, beat, or shoot resisters. If the dictators can no longer rely on
the police and military forces to carry out repression, the dictatorship
is gravely threatened.
In summary, success against an entrenched dictatorship requires
that noncooperation and defiance reduce and remove the sources of
the regime’s power. Without constant replenishment of the necessary
sources of power the dictatorship will weaken and finally disinte-
grate. Competent strategic planning of political defiance against
dictatorships therefore needs to target the dictators’ most important
sources of power.
From Dictatorship to Democracy 69
escalating freedom
Combined with political defiance during the phase of selective re-
sistance, the growth of autonomous social, economic, cultural, and
political institutions progressively expands the “democratic space”
of the society and shrinks the control of the dictatorship. As the civil
institutions of the society become stronger vis-à-vis the dictatorship,
then, whatever the dictators may wish, the population is incremen-
tally building an independent society outside of their control. If and
when the dictatorship intervenes to halt this “escalating freedom,”
nonviolent struggle can be applied in defense of this newly won
space and the dictatorship will be faced with yet another “front” in
the struggle.
In time, this combination of resistance and institution building
can lead to de facto freedom, making the collapse of the dictator-
ship and the formal installation of a democratic system undeniable
because the power relationships within the society have been fun-
damentally altered.
Poland in the 1970s and 1980s provides a clear example of the
progressive reclaiming of a society’s functions and institutions by
the resistance. The Catholic church had been persecuted but never
brought under full Communist control. In 1976 certain intellectuals
and workers formed small groups such as K.O.R. (Workers Defense
Committee) to advance their political ideas. The organization of
the Solidarity trade union with its power to wield effective strikes
forced its own legalization in 1980. Peasants, students, and many
other groups also formed their own independent organizations.
When the Communists realized that these groups had changed the
power realities, Solidarity was again banned and the Communists
resorted to military rule.
Even under martial law, with many imprisonments and harsh
persecution, the new independent institutions of the society con-
tinued to function. For example, dozens of illegal newspapers and
magazines continued to be published. Illegal publishing houses an-
nually issued hundreds of books, while well-known writers boycot-
ted Communist publications and government publishing houses.
70 Gene Sharp
Similar activities continued in other parts of the society.
Under the Jaruselski military regime, the military-Communist
government was at one point described as bouncing around on the
top of the society. The officials still occupied government offices and
buildings. The regime could still strike down into the society, with
punishments, arrests, imprisonment, seizure of printing presses, and
the like. The dictatorship, however, could not control the society.
From that point, it was only a matter of time until the society was
able to bring down the regime completely.
Even while a dictatorship still occupies government positions
it is sometimes possible to organize a democratic “parallel govern-
ment.” This would increasingly operate as a rival government to
which loyalty, compliance, and cooperation are given by the popu-
lation and the society’s institutions. The dictatorship would then
consequently, on an increasing basis, be deprived of these character-
istics of government. Eventually, the democratic parallel government
may fully replace the dictatorial regime as part of the transition to
a democratic system. In due course then a constitution would be
adopted and elections held as part of the transition.
Disintegrating the dictatorship
While the institutional transformation of the society is taking place,
the defiance and noncooperation movement may escalate. Strategists
of the democratic forces should contemplate early that there will
come a time when the democratic forces can move beyond selective
resistance and launch mass defiance. In most cases, time will be
required for creating, building, or expanding resistance capacities,
and the development of mass defiance may occur only after several
years. During this interim period campaigns of selective resistance
should be launched with increasingly important political objectives.
Larger parts of the population at all levels of the society should be-
come involved. Given determined and disciplined political defiance
during this escalation of activities, the internal weaknesses of the
dictatorship are likely to become increasingly obvious.
From Dictatorship to Democracy 71
The combination of strong political defiance and the building
of independent institutions is likely in time to produce widespread
international attention favorable to the democratic forces. It may also
produce international diplomatic condemnations, boycotts, and em-
bargoes in support of the democratic forces (as it did for Poland).
Strategists should be aware that in some situations the collapse
of the dictatorship may occur extremely rapidly, as in East Germany
in 1989. This can happen when the sources of power are massively
severed as a result of the whole population’s revulsion against the
dictatorship. This pattern is not usual, however, and it is better to
plan for a long-term struggle (but to be prepared for a short one).
During the course of the liberation struggle, victories, even on
limited issues, should be celebrated. Those who have earned the
victory should be recognized. Celebrations with vigilance should
also help to keep up the morale needed for future stages of the
struggle.
handling success responsibly
Planners of the grand strategy should calculate in advance the pos-
sible and preferred ways in which a successful struggle might best
be concluded in order to prevent the rise of a new dictatorship and to
ensure the gradual establishment of a durable democratic system.
The democrats should calculate how the transition from the
dictatorship to the interim government shall be handled at the end
of the struggle. It is desirable at that time to establish quickly a new
functioning government. However, it must not be merely the old
one with new personnel. It is necessary to calculate what sections of
the old governmental structure (as the political police) are to be com-
pletely abolished because of their inherent anti-democratic character
and which sections retained to be subjected to later democratization
efforts. A complete governmental void could open the way to chaos
or a new dictatorship.
Thought should be given in advance to determine what is to be
the policy toward high officials of the dictatorship when its power
72 Gene Sharp
disintegrates. For example, are the dictators to be brought to trial in
a court? Are they to be permitted to leave the country permanently?
What other options may there be that are consistent with political
defiance, the need for reconstructing the country, and building a
democracy following the victory? A blood bath must be avoided
which could have drastic consequences on the possibility of a future
democratic system.
Specific plans for the transition to democracy should be ready
for application when the dictatorship is weakening or collapses.
Such plans will help to prevent another group from seizing state
power through a coup d’état. Plans for the institution of democratic
constitutional government with full political and personal liberties
will also be required. The changes won at a great price should not
be lost through lack of planning.
When confronted with the increasingly empowered population
and the growth of independent democratic groups and institutions —
both of which the dictatorship is unable to control — the dictators will
find that their whole venture is unravelling. Massive shut-downs of
the society, general strikes, mass stay-at-homes, defiant marches, or
other activities will increasingly undermine the dictators’ own orga-
nization and related institutions. As a consequence of such defiance
and noncooperation, executed wisely and with mass participation
over time, the dictators would become powerless and the democratic
defenders would, without violence, triumph. The dictatorship would
disintegrate before the defiant population.
Not every such effort will succeed, especially not easily, and
rarely quickly. It should be remembered that as many military wars
are lost as are won. However, political defiance offers a real possibili-
ty of victory. As stated earlier, that possibility can be greatly increased
through the development of a wise grand strategy, careful strategic
planning, hard work, and disciplined courageous struggle.
t
en
grounDwork For Durable Democracy
The disintegration of the dictatorship is of course a cause for major
celebration. People who have suffered for so long and struggled
at great price merit a time of joy, relaxation, and recognition. They
should feel proud of themselves and of all who struggled with them
to win political freedom. Not all will have lived to see this day. The
living and the dead will be remembered as heroes who helped to
shape the history of freedom in their country.
Unfortunately, this is not a time for a reduction in vigilance.
Even in the event of a successful disintegration of the dictatorship
by political defiance, careful precautions must be taken to prevent
the rise of a new oppressive regime out of the confusion following
the collapse of the old one. The leaders of the pro-democracy forces
should have prepared in advance for an orderly transition to a de-
mocracy. The dictatorial structures will need to be dismantled. The
constitutional and legal bases and standards of behavior of a durable
democracy will need to be built.
No one should believe that with the downfall of the dictatorship
an ideal society will immediately appear. The disintegration of the
dictatorship simply provides the beginning point, under conditions
of enhanced freedom, for long-term efforts to improve the society and
meet human needs more adequately. Serious political, economic, and
social problems will continue for years, requiring the cooperation of
many people and groups in seeking their resolution. The new politi-
cal system should provide the opportunities for people with varying
outlooks and favored measures to continue constructive work and
policy development to deal with problems in the future.
threats of a new dictatorship
Aristotle warned long ago that “. . . tyranny can also change into
tyranny. . .”14 There is ample historical evidence from France (the
14 Aristotle, The Politics, Book V, Chapter 12, p. 233.
73
74 Gene Sharp
Jacobins and Napoleon), Russia (the Bolsheviks), Iran (the Ayatol-
lah), Burma (SLORC), and elsewhere that the collapse of an oppres-
sive regime will be seen by some persons and groups as merely the
opportunity for them to step in as the new masters. Their motives
may vary, but the results are often approximately the same. The
new dictatorship may even be more cruel and total in its control
than the old one.
Even before the collapse of the dictatorship, members of the old
regime may attempt to cut short the defiance struggle for democracy
by staging a coup d’état designed to preempt victory by the popular
resistance. It may claim to oust the dictatorship, but in fact seek only
to impose a new refurbished model of the old one.
blocking coups
There are ways in which coups against newly liberated societies can
be defeated. Advance knowledge of that defense capacity may at
times be sufficient to deter the attempt. Preparation can produce
prevention.
Immediately after a coup is started, the putschists require le-
gitimacy, that is, acceptance of their moral and political right to rule.
The first basic principle of anti-coup defense is therefore to deny
legitimacy to the putschists.
The putschists also require that the civilian leaders and popula-
tion be supportive, confused, or just passive. The putschists require
the cooperation of specialists and advisors, bureaucrats and civil
servants, administrators and judges in order to consolidate their
control over the affected society. The putschists also require that the
multitude of people who operate the political system, the society’s
institutions, the economy, the police, and the military forces will
passively submit and carry out their usual functions as modified by
the putschists’ orders and policies.
The second basic principle of anti-coup defense is to resist the
putschists with noncooperation and defiance. The needed coopera-
tion and assistance must be denied. Essentially the same means of
struggle that was used against the dictatorship can be used against
From Dictatorship to Democracy 75
the new threat, but applied immediately. If both legitimacy and
cooperation are denied, the coup may die of political starvation and
the chance to build a democratic society restored.
constitution drafting
The new democratic system will require a constitution that estab-
lishes the desired framework of the democratic government. The
constitution should set the purposes of government, limits on
governmental powers, the means and timing of elections by which
governmental officials and legislators will be chosen, the inherent
rights of the people, and the relation of the national government to
other lower levels of government.
Within the central government, if it is to remain democratic,
a clear division of authority should be established between the
legislative, executive, and judicial branches of government. Strong
restrictions should be included on activities of the police, intelligence
services, and military forces to prohibit any legal political interfer-
ence.
In the interests of preserving the democratic system and im-
peding dictatorial trends and measures, the constitution should
preferably be one that establishes a federal system with significant
prerogatives reserved for the regional, state, and local levels of gov-
ernment. In some situations the Swiss system of cantons might be
considered in which relatively small areas retain major prerogatives,
while remaining a part of the whole country.
If a constitution with many of these features existed earlier in
the newly liberated country’s history, it may be wise simply to restore
it to operation, amending it as deemed necessary and desirable. If
a suitable older constitution is not present, it may be necessary to
operate with an interim constitution. Otherwise, a new constitu-
tion will need to be prepared. Preparing a new constitution will
take considerable time and thought. Popular participation in this
process is desirable and required for ratification of a new text or
amendments. One should be very cautious about including in the
constitution promises that later might prove impossible to imple-
76 Gene Sharp
ment or provisions that would require a highly centralized govern-
ment, for both can facilitate a new dictatorship.
The wording of the constitution should be easily understood
by the majority of the population. A constitution should not be so
complex or ambiguous that only lawyers or other elites can claim
to understand it.
a democratic defense policy
The liberated country may also face foreign threats for which a
defense capacity would be required. The country might also be
threatened by foreign attempts to establish economic, political, or
military domination.
In the interests of maintaining internal democracy, serious
consideration should be given to applying the basic principles of
political defiance to the needs of national defense.15 By placing resis-
tance capacity directly in the hands of the citizenry, newly liberated
countries could avoid the need to establish a strong military capac-
ity which could itself threaten democracy or require vast economic
resources much needed for other purposes.
It must be remembered that some groups will ignore any con-
stitutional provision in their aim to establish themselves as new
dictators. Therefore, a permanent role will exist for the population to
apply political defiance and noncooperation against would-be dicta-
tors and to preserve democratic structures, rights, and procedures.
a meritorious responsibility
The effect of nonviolent struggle is not only to weaken and remove
the dictators but also to empower the oppressed. This technique
enables people who formerly felt themselves to be only pawns or
victims to wield power directly in order to gain by their own efforts
greater freedom and justice. This experience of struggle has impor-
15 See Gene Sharp, Civilian-Based Defense: A Post-Military Weapons System (Princ-
eton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1990).
From Dictatorship to Democracy 77
tant psychological consequences, contributing to increased self-es-
teem and self-confidence among the formerly powerless.
One important long-term beneficial consequence of the use of
nonviolent struggle for establishing democratic government is that
the society will be more capable of dealing with continuing and
future problems. These might include future governmental abuse
and corruption, maltreatment of any group, economic injustices, and
limitations on the democratic qualities of the political system. The
population experienced in the use of political defiance is less likely
to be vulnerable to future dictatorships.
After liberation, familiarity with nonviolent struggle will pro-
vide ways to defend democracy, civil liberties, minority rights, and
prerogatives of regional, state, and local governments and nongov-
ernmental institutions. Such means also provide ways by which
people and groups can express extreme dissent peacefully on issues
seen as so important that opposition groups have sometimes resorted
to terrorism or guerrilla warfare.
The thoughts in this examination of political defiance or non-
violent struggle are intended to be helpful to all persons and groups
who seek to lift dictatorial oppression from their people and to es-
tablish a durable democratic system that respects human freedoms
and popular action to improve the society.
There are three major conclusions to the ideas sketched here:
• Liberation from dictatorships is possible;
• Very careful thought and strategic planning will be required
to achieve it; and
• Vigilance, hard work, and disciplined struggle, often at great
cost, will be needed.
78 Gene Sharp
The oft quoted phrase “Freedom is not free” is true. No outside
force is coming to give oppressed people the freedom they so much
want. People will have to learn how to take that freedom themselves.
Easy it cannot be.
If people can grasp what is required for their own liberation,
they can chart courses of action which, through much travail, can
eventually bring them their freedom. Then, with diligence they
can construct a new democratic order and prepare for its defense.
Freedom won by struggle of this type can be durable. It can be
maintained by a tenacious people committed to its preservation
and enrichment.
a o
ppenDix ne
the methoDs oF nonviolent action16
the methoDs oF nonviolent protest anD
persUasion
Formal statements
1. Public speeches
2. Letters of opposition or support
3. Declarations by organizations and institutions
4. Signed public statements
5. Declarations of indictment and intention
6. Group or mass petitions
communications with a wider audience
7. Slogans, caricatures, and symbols
8. Banners, posters, and displayed communications
9. Leaflets, pamphlets, and books
10. Newspapers and journals
11. Records, radio, and television
12. Skywriting and earthwriting
Group representations
13. Deputations
14. Mock awards
15. Group lobbying
16. Picketing
17. Mock elections
symbolic public acts
18. Display of flags and symbolic colors
19. Wearing of symbols
16 This list, with definitions and historical examples, is taken from Gene Sharp,
The Politics of Nonviolent Action, Part Two, The Methods of Nonviolent Action.
79
80 Gene Sharp
20. Prayer and worship
21. Delivering symbolic objects
22. Protest disrobings
23. Destruction of own property
24. Symbolic lights
25. Displays of portraits
26. Paint as protest
27. New signs and names
28. Symbolic sounds
29. Symbolic reclamations
30. Rude gestures
pressures on individuals
31. “Haunting” officials
32. Taunting officials
33. Fraternization
34. Vigils
Drama and music
35. Humorous skits and pranks
36. Performance of plays and music
37. Singing
processions
38. Marches
39. Parades
40. Religious processions
41. Pilgrimages
42. Motorcades
honoring the dead
43. Political mourning
44. Mock funerals
45. Demonstrative funerals
46. Homage at burial places
From Dictatorship to Democracy 81
public assemblies
47. Assemblies of protest or support
48. Protest meetings
49. Camouflaged meetings of protest
50. Teach-ins
Withdrawal and renunciation
51. Walk-outs
52. Silence
53. Renouncing honors
54. Turning one’s back
the methoDs oF social noncooperation
ostracism of persons
55. Social boycott
56. Selective social boycott
57. Lysistratic nonaction
58. Excommunication
59. Interdict
noncooperation with social events, customs, and institutions
60. Suspension of social and sports activities
61. Boycott of social affairs
62. Student strike
63. Social disobedience
64. Withdrawal from social institutions
Withdrawal from the social system
65. Stay-at-home
66. Total personal noncooperation
67. Flight of workers
68. Sanctuary
69. Collective disappearance
70. Protest emigration (hijrat)
82 Gene Sharp
the methoDs oF economic noncooperation:
(1) economic boycotts
action by consumers
71. Consumers’ boycott
72. Nonconsumption of boycotted goods
73. Policy of austerity
74. Rent withholding
75. Refusal to rent
76. National consumers’ boycott
77. International consumers’ boycott
action by workers and producers
78. Workmen’s boycott
79. Producers’ boycott
action by middlemen
80. Suppliers’ and handlers’ boycott
action by owners and management
81. Traders’ boycott
82. Refusal to let or sell property
83. Lockout
84. Refusal of industrial assistance
85. Merchants’ “general strike”
Action by holders of financial resources
86. Withdrawal of bank deposits
87. Refusal to pay fees, dues, and assessments
88. Refusal to pay debts or interest
89. Severance of funds and credit
90. Revenue refusal
91. Refusal of a government’s money
action by governments
92. Domestic embargo
93. Blacklisting of traders
94. International sellers’ embargo
95. International buyers’ embargo
96. International trade embargo
From Dictatorship to Democracy 83
the methoDs oF economic noncooperation:
(2) the striKe
symbolic strikes
97. Protest strike
98. Quickie walkout (lightning strike)
agricultural strikes
99. Peasant strike
100. Farm workers’ strike
strikes by special groups
101. Refusal of impressed labor
102. Prisoners’ strike
103. Craft strike
104. Professional strike
ordinary industrial strikes
105. Establishment strike
106. Industry strike
107. Sympathetic strike
restricted strikes
108. Detailed strike
109. Bumper strike
110. Slowdown strike
111. Working-to-rule strike
112. Reporting “sick” (sick-in)
113. Strike by resignation
114. Limited strike
115. Selective strike
multi-industry strikes
116. Generalized strike
117. General strike
combinations of strikes and economic closures
118. Hartal
119. Economic shutdown
84 Gene Sharp
the methoDs oF political noncooperation
rejection of authority
120. Withholding or withdrawal of allegiance
121. Refusal of public support
122. Literature and speeches advocating resistance
citizens’ noncooperation with government
123. Boycott of legislative bodies
124. Boycott of elections
125. Boycott of government employment and positions
126. Boycott of government departments, agencies and
other bodies
127. Withdrawal from government educational institutions
128. Boycott of government-supported organizations
129. Refusal of assistance to enforcement agents
130. Removal of own signs and placemarks
131. Refusal to accept appointed officials
132. Refusal to dissolve existing institutions
citizens’ alternatives to obedience
133. Reluctant and slow compliance
134. Nonobedience in absence of direct supervision
135. Popular nonobedience
136. Disguised disobedience
137. Refusal of an assemblage or meeting to disperse
138. Sitdown
139. Noncooperation with conscription and deportation
140. Hiding, escape and false identities
141. Civil disobedience of “illegitimate” laws
action by government personnel
142. Selective refusal of assistance by government aides
143. Blocking of lines of command and information
144. Stalling and obstruction
145. General administrative noncooperation
From Dictatorship to Democracy 85
146. Judicial noncooperation
147. Deliberate inefficiency and selective noncooperation by
enforcement agents
148. Mutiny
Domestic governmental action
149. Quasi-legal evasions and delays
150. Noncooperation by constituent governmental units
international governmental action
151. Changes in diplomatic and other representation
152. Delay and cancellation of diplomatic events
153. Withholding of diplomatic recognition
154. Severance of diplomatic relations
155. Withdrawal from international organizations
156. Refusal of membership in international bodies
157. Expulsion from international organizations
the methoDs oF nonviolent intervention
psychological intervention
158. Self-exposure to the elements
159. The fast
(a) Fast of moral pressure
(b) Hunger strike
(c) Satyagrahic fast
160. Reverse trial
161. Nonviolent harassment
physical intervention
162. Sit-in
163. Stand-in
164. Ride-in
165. Wade-in
166. Mill-in
167. Pray-in
168. Nonviolent raids
86 Gene Sharp
169. Nonviolent air raids
170. Nonviolent invasion
171. Nonviolent interjection
172. Nonviolent obstruction
173. Nonviolent occupation
social intervention
174. Establishing new social patterns
175. Overloading of facilities
176. Stall-in
177. Speak-in
178. Guerrilla theater
179. Alternative social institutions
180. Alternative communication system
economic intervention
181. Reverse strike
182. Stay-in strike
183. Nonviolent land seizure
184. Defiance of blockades
185. Politically motivated counterfeiting
186. Preclusive purchasing
187. Seizure of assets
188. Dumping
189. Selective patronage
190. Alternative markets
191. Alternative transportation systems
192. Alternative economic institutions
political intervention
193. Overloading of administrative systems
194. Disclosing identities of secret agents
195. Seeking imprisonment
196. Civil disobedience of “neutral” laws
197. Work-on without collaboration
198. Dual sovereignty and parallel government
a t
ppenDix wo
acknowleDgements anD notes on
the history oF From Dictatorship
to Democracy
I have incurred several debts of gratitude while writing the
original edition of this essay. Bruce Jenkins, my Special Assistant
in 1993, made an inestimable contribution by his identification of
problems in content and presentation. He also made incisive recom-
mendations for more rigorous and clearer presentations of difficult
ideas (especially concerning strategy), structural reorganization, and
editorial improvements.
I am also grateful for the editorial assistance of Stephen Coady.
Dr. Christopher Kruegler and Robert Helvey offered very important
criticisms and advice. Dr. Hazel McFerson and Dr. Patricia Parkman
provided information on struggles in Africa and Latin America, re-
spectively. However, the analysis and conclusions contained therein
are solely my responsibility.
In recent years special guidelines for translations have been
developed, primarily due to Jamila Raqib’s guidance and to the
lessons learned from earlier years. This has been necessary in order
to ensure accuracy in languages in which there has earlier been no
established clear terminology for this field.
“From Dictatorship to Democracy” was written at the request
of the late U Tin Maung Win, a prominent exile Burmese democrat
who was then editor of Khit Pyaing (The New Era Journal).
The preparation of this text was based over forty years of re-
search and writing on nonviolent struggle, dictatorships, totalitarian
systems, resistance movements, political theory, sociological analysis,
and other fields.
I could not write an analysis that had a focus only on Burma,
87
88 Gene Sharp
as I did not know Burma well. Therefore, I had to write a generic
analysis.
The essay was originally published in installments in Khit Pyaing
in Burmese and English in Bangkok, Thailand in 1993. Afterwards
it was issued as a booklet in both languages (1994) and in Burmese
again (1996 and 1997). The original booklet editions from Bangkok
were issued with the assistance of the Committee for the Restoration
of Democracy in Burma.
It was circulated both surreptitiously inside Burma and among
exiles and sympathizers elsewhere. This analysis was intended only
for use by Burmese democrats and various ethnic groups in Burma
that wanted independence from the Burman-dominated central
government in Rangoon. (Burmans are the dominant ethnic group
in Burma.)
I did not then envisage that the generic focus would make the
analysis potentially relevant in any country with an authoritarian
or dictatorial government. However, that appears to have been the
perception by people who in recent years have sought to translate
and distribute it in their languages for their countries. Several per-
sons have reported that it reads as though it was written for their
country.
The SLORC military dictatorship in Rangoon wasted no time
in denouncing this publication. Heavy attacks were made in 1995
and 1996, and reportedly continued in later years in newspapers,
radio, and television. As late as 2005, persons were sentenced to
seven-year prison terms merely for being in possession of the banned
publication.
Although no efforts were made to promote the publication for
use in other countries, translations and distribution of the publica-
tion began to spread on their own. A copy of the English language
edition was seen on display in the window of a bookstore in Bangkok
by a student from Indonesia, was purchased, and taken back home.
There, it was translated into Indonesian, and published in 1997 by a
major Indonesian publisher with an introduction by Abdurrahman
Wahid. He was then head of Nadhlatul Ulama, the largest Muslim
organization in the world with thirty-five million members, and later
From Dictatorship to Democracy 89
President of Indonesia.
During this time, at my office at the Albert Einstein Institution
we only had a handful of photocopies from the Bangkok English
language booklet. For a few years we had to make copies of it when
we had enquiries for which it was relevant. Later, Marek Zelaskiewz,
from California, took one of those copies to Belgrade during Miloso-
vic’s time and gave it to the organization Civic Initiatives. They
translated it into Serbian and published it. When we visited Serbia
after the collapse of the Milosevic regime we were told that the book-
let had been quite influential in the opposition movement.
Also important had been the workshop on nonviolent struggle
that Robert Helvey, a retired US Army colonel, had given in Budapest,
Hungary, for about twenty Serbian young people on the nature and
potential of nonviolent struggle. Helvey also gave them copies of
the complete The Politics of Nonviolent Action. These were the people
who became the Otpor organization that led the nonviolent struggle
that brought down Milosevic.
We usually do not know how awareness of this publication has
spread from country to country. Its availability on our web site in
recent years has been important, but clearly that is not the only factor.
Tracing these connections would be a major research project.
“From Dictatorship to Democracy” is a heavy analysis and is not
easy reading. Yet it has been deemed to be important enough for at
least twenty-eight translations (as of January 2008) to be prepared,
although they required major work and expense.
Translations of this publication in print or on a web site include
the following languages: Amharic (Ethiopia), Arabic, Azeri (Azerbai-
jan), Bahasa Indonesia, Belarusian, Burmese, Chin (Burma), Chinese
(simplified and traditional Mandarin), Dhivehi (Maldives), Farsi
(Iran), French, Georgian, German, Jing Paw (Burma), Karen (Burma),
Khmer (Cambodia), Kurdish, Kyrgyz (Kyrgyzstan), Nepali, Pashto
(Afghanistan and Pakistan), Russian, Serbian, Spanish, Tibetan,
Tigrinya (Eritrea), Ukrainian, Uzbek (Uzbekistan), and Vietnamese.
Several others are in preparation.
Between 1993 and 2002 there were six translations. Between
2003 and 2008 there have been twenty-two.
90 Gene Sharp
The great diversity of the societies and languages into which
translations have spread support the provisional conclusion that the
persons who initially encounter this document have seen its analysis
to be relevant to their society.
Gene Sharp
January 2008
Albert Einstein Institution
Boston, Massachusetts
a t
ppenDix hree
a note about translations
and reprinting of this publication
To facilitate dissemination of this publication it has been placed in
the public domain. That means that anyone is free to reproduce it
or disseminate it.
The author, however, does have several requests that he would
like to make, although individuals are under no legal obligation to
follow such requests.
• The author requests that no changes be made in the text, either
additions or deletions, if it is reproduced.
• The author requests notification from individuals who intend
to reproduce this document. Notification can be given to the
Albert Einstein Institution (contact information appears in the
beginning of this publication immediately before the Table of
Contents).
• The author requests that if this document is going to be trans-
lated, great care must be taken to preserve the original meaning
of the text. Some of the terms in this publication will not trans-
late readily into other languages, as direct equivalents for “non-
violent struggle” and related terms may not be available. Thus,
careful consideration must be given to how these terms and
concepts are to be translated so as to be understood accurately
by new readers.
For individuals and groups that wish to translate this work,
the Albert Einstein Institution has developed a standard set of trans-
lation procedures that may assist them. They are as follows:
• A selection process takes place to select a translator. Candi-
91
92 Gene Sharp
dates are evaluated on their fluency in both English and the
language into which the work will be translated. Candidates
are also evaluated on their general knowledge surrounding the
subject area and their understanding of the terms and concepts
present in the text.
• An evaluator is selected by a similar process. The evaluator’s
job is to thoroughly review the translation and to provide feed-
back and criticism to the translator. It is often better if the trans-
lator and evaluator do not know the identities of each other.
• Once the translator and evaluator are selected, the translator
submits a sample translation of two or three pages of the text,
as well as a list of a number of significant key terms that are
present in the text.
• The evaluator evaluates this sample translation and presents
feedback to the translator.
• If major problems exist between the translator’s sample trans-
lation and the evaluator’s evaluation of that translation, then
either the translator or the evaluator may be replaced, depend-
ing upon the judgement of the individual or group that is spon-
soring the translation. If minor problems exist, the transla-
tor proceeds with the full translation of the text, keeping in mind
the comments of the evaluator.
• O nce the entire text is translated, the evaluator evaluates the
entire text and gives feedback to the translator.
• Once the translator has considered this feedback and made
any necessary changes, the final version of the text is complete and
the translated book is ready to be printed and distributed.
From Dictatorship to Democracy 93
For Further reading
1. The Anti-Coup by Gene Sharp and Bruce Jenkins. Boston: The
Albert Einstein Institution, 2003.
2. Sharp’s Dictionary of Power and Struggle: Language of Civil Resistance in
Conflicts by Gene Sharp. New York: Oxford University Press, 2011.
3. On Strategic Nonviolent Conflict: Thinking About the Funda-
mentals by Robert L. Helvey. Boston: The Albert Einstein Institu-
tion, 2002.
4. The Politics of Nonviolent Action (3 vols.) by Gene Sharp. Boston:
Extending Horizons Books, Porter Sargent Publishers, 1973.
5. Self-Liberation by Gene Sharp with the assistance of Jamila
Raqib. Boston: The Albert Einstein Institution, 2010.
6. Social Power and Political Freedom by Gene Sharp. Boston: Extend-
ing Horizons Books, Porter Sargent Publishers, 1980.
7. There Are Realistic Alternatives by Gene Sharp. Boston: The Albert
Einstein Institution, 2003.
8. Waging Nonviolent Struggle: 20th Century Practice and 21st Century
Potential by Gene Sharp. Boston: Extending Horizons Books, Porter
Sargent Publishers, 2005.
For order information, please contact:
The Albert Einstein Institution
P.O. Box 455
East Boston, MA 02128, USA
Tel: USA +1 617-247-4882
Fax: USA +1 617-247-4035
E-mail: einstein@igc.org
Website: www.aeinstein.org

